spam	The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens
ham	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
ham	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
spam	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
spam	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
spam	Title: A Tale of Two Cities
spam	       A Story of the French Revolution
spam	Author: Charles Dickens
ham	Release Date: January, 1994 [EBook #98]
spam	Posting Date: November 28, 2009
spam	[Last updated: November 27, 2013]
spam	Language: English
spam	*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF TWO CITIES ***
ham	Produced by Judith Boss
spam	A TALE OF TWO CITIES
spam	A STORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
ham	By Charles Dickens
spam	CONTENTS
ham	     Book the First--Recalled to Life
spam	     Chapter I      The Period
ham	     Chapter II     The Mail
ham	     Chapter III    The Night Shadows
spam	     Chapter IV     The Preparation
ham	     Chapter V      The Wine-shop
spam	     Chapter VI     The Shoemaker
ham	     Book the Second--the Golden Thread
ham	     Chapter I      Five Years Later
spam	     Chapter II     A Sight
spam	     Chapter III    A Disappointment
ham	     Chapter IV     Congratulatory
spam	     Chapter V      The Jackal
spam	     Chapter VI     Hundreds of People
spam	     Chapter VII    Monseigneur in Town
ham	     Chapter VIII   Monseigneur in the Country
ham	     Chapter IX     The Gorgon's Head
spam	     Chapter X      Two Promises
ham	     Chapter XI     A Companion Picture
ham	     Chapter XII    The Fellow of Delicacy
ham	     Chapter XIII   The Fellow of no Delicacy
ham	     Chapter XIV    The Honest Tradesman
spam	     Chapter XV     Knitting
spam	     Chapter XVI    Still Knitting
spam	     Chapter XVII   One Night
ham	     Chapter XVIII  Nine Days
spam	     Chapter XIX    An Opinion
spam	     Chapter XX     A Plea
spam	     Chapter XXI    Echoing Footsteps
spam	     Chapter XXII   The Sea Still Rises
spam	     Chapter XXIII  Fire Rises
ham	     Chapter XXIV   Drawn to the Loadstone Rock
ham	     Book the Third--the Track of a Storm
spam	     Chapter I      In Secret
spam	     Chapter II     The Grindstone
ham	     Chapter III    The Shadow
ham	     Chapter IV     Calm in Storm
spam	     Chapter V      The Wood-sawyer
spam	     Chapter VI     Triumph
spam	     Chapter VII    A Knock at the Door
spam	     Chapter VIII   A Hand at Cards
ham	     Chapter IX     The Game Made
spam	     Chapter X      The Substance of the Shadow
ham	     Chapter XI     Dusk
spam	     Chapter XII    Darkness
spam	     Chapter XIII   Fifty-two
spam	     Chapter XIV    The Knitting Done
ham	     Chapter XV     The Footsteps Die Out For Ever
spam	Book the First--Recalled to Life
ham	I. The Period
ham	It was the best of times,
ham	it was the worst of times,
spam	it was the age of wisdom,
ham	it was the age of foolishness,
spam	it was the epoch of belief,
ham	it was the epoch of incredulity,
spam	it was the season of Light,
spam	it was the season of Darkness,
spam	it was the spring of hope,
spam	it was the winter of despair,
ham	we had everything before us,
spam	we had nothing before us,
ham	we were all going direct to Heaven,
ham	we were all going direct the other way--
spam	in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of
spam	its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for
spam	evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.
spam	There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face, on the
spam	throne of England; there were a king with a large jaw and a queen with
spam	a fair face, on the throne of France. In both countries it was clearer
ham	than crystal to the lords of the State preserves of loaves and fishes,
ham	that things in general were settled for ever.
ham	It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five.
ham	Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at that favoured period,
spam	as at this. Mrs. Southcott had recently attained her five-and-twentieth
spam	blessed birthday, of whom a prophetic private in the Life Guards had
ham	heralded the sublime appearance by announcing that arrangements were
ham	made for the swallowing up of London and Westminster. Even the Cock-lane
ham	ghost had been laid only a round dozen of years, after rapping out its
spam	messages, as the spirits of this very year last past (supernaturally
ham	deficient in originality) rapped out theirs. Mere messages in the
spam	earthly order of events had lately come to the English Crown and People,
ham	from a congress of British subjects in America: which, strange
ham	to relate, have proved more important to the human race than any
ham	communications yet received through any of the chickens of the Cock-lane
spam	brood.
ham	France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual than her
spam	sister of the shield and trident, rolled with exceeding smoothness down
ham	hill, making paper money and spending it. Under the guidance of her
spam	Christian pastors, she entertained herself, besides, with such humane
ham	achievements as sentencing a youth to have his hands cut off, his tongue
ham	torn out with pincers, and his body burned alive, because he had not
ham	kneeled down in the rain to do honour to a dirty procession of monks
ham	which passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty or sixty
spam	yards. It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods of France and
ham	Norway, there were growing trees, when that sufferer was put to death,
ham	already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to come down and be sawn into
ham	boards, to make a certain movable framework with a sack and a knife in
spam	it, terrible in history. It is likely enough that in the rough outhouses
spam	of some tillers of the heavy lands adjacent to Paris, there were
spam	sheltered from the weather that very day, rude carts, bespattered with
spam	rustic mire, snuffed about by pigs, and roosted in by poultry, which
ham	the Farmer, Death, had already set apart to be his tumbrils of
ham	the Revolution. But that Woodman and that Farmer, though they work
spam	unceasingly, work silently, and no one heard them as they went about
spam	with muffled tread: the rather, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion
spam	that they were awake, was to be atheistical and traitorous.
spam	In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protection to
spam	justify much national boasting. Daring burglaries by armed men, and
spam	highway robberies, took place in the capital itself every night;
spam	families were publicly cautioned not to go out of town without removing
spam	their furniture to upholsterers' warehouses for security; the highwayman
ham	in the dark was a City tradesman in the light, and, being recognised and
ham	challenged by his fellow-tradesman whom he stopped in his character of
ham	"the Captain," gallantly shot him through the head and rode away; the
spam	mail was waylaid by seven robbers, and the guard shot three dead, and
spam	then got shot dead himself by the other four, "in consequence of the
ham	failure of his ammunition:" after which the mail was robbed in peace;
spam	that magnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of London, was made to stand
ham	and deliver on Turnham Green, by one highwayman, who despoiled the
ham	illustrious creature in sight of all his retinue; prisoners in London
ham	gaols fought battles with their turnkeys, and the majesty of the law
ham	fired blunderbusses in among them, loaded with rounds of shot and ball;
spam	thieves snipped off diamond crosses from the necks of noble lords at
spam	Court drawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles's, to search
ham	for contraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and the
spam	musketeers fired on the mob, and nobody thought any of these occurrences
spam	much out of the common way. In the midst of them, the hangman, ever busy
spam	and ever worse than useless, was in constant requisition; now, stringing
spam	up long rows of miscellaneous criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on
spam	Saturday who had been taken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the
ham	hand at Newgate by the dozen, and now burning pamphlets at the door of
spam	Westminster Hall; to-day, taking the life of an atrocious murderer,
spam	and to-morrow of a wretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer's boy of
spam	sixpence.
ham	All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass in and close
spam	upon the dear old year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five.
spam	Environed by them, while the Woodman and the Farmer worked unheeded,
ham	those two of the large jaws, and those other two of the plain and the
spam	fair faces, trod with stir enough, and carried their divine rights
ham	with a high hand. Thus did the year one thousand seven hundred
spam	and seventy-five conduct their Greatnesses, and myriads of small
ham	creatures--the creatures of this chronicle among the rest--along the
spam	roads that lay before them.
ham	II. The Mail
spam	It was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November,
ham	before the first of the persons with whom this history has business.
spam	The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as it lumbered up
spam	Shooter's Hill. He walked up hill in the mire by the side of the mail,
spam	as the rest of the passengers did; not because they had the least relish
spam	for walking exercise, under the circumstances, but because the hill,
ham	and the harness, and the mud, and the mail, were all so heavy, that the
ham	horses had three times already come to a stop, besides once drawing the
spam	coach across the road, with the mutinous intent of taking it back
spam	to Blackheath. Reins and whip and coachman and guard, however, in
spam	combination, had read that article of war which forbade a purpose
ham	otherwise strongly in favour of the argument, that some brute animals
ham	are endued with Reason; and the team had capitulated and returned to
spam	their duty.
ham	With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their way through
ham	the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles, as if they were
ham	falling to pieces at the larger joints. As often as the driver rested
ham	them and brought them to a stand, with a wary "Wo-ho! so-ho-then!" the
spam	near leader violently shook his head and everything upon it--like an
ham	unusually emphatic horse, denying that the coach could be got up the
spam	hill. Whenever the leader made this rattle, the passenger started, as a
ham	nervous passenger might, and was disturbed in mind.
spam	There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed in its
ham	forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest and finding
spam	none. A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its slow way through the
ham	air in ripples that visibly followed and overspread one another, as the
spam	waves of an unwholesome sea might do. It was dense enough to shut out
ham	everything from the light of the coach-lamps but these its own workings,
spam	and a few yards of road; and the reek of the labouring horses steamed
ham	into it, as if they had made it all.
spam	Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill by the
spam	side of the mail. All three were wrapped to the cheekbones and over the
spam	ears, and wore jack-boots. Not one of the three could have said, from
ham	anything he saw, what either of the other two was like; and each was
ham	hidden under almost as many wrappers from the eyes of the mind, as from
ham	the eyes of the body, of his two companions. In those days, travellers
spam	were very shy of being confidential on a short notice, for anybody on
ham	the road might be a robber or in league with robbers. As to the latter,
ham	when every posting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in
ham	"the Captain's" pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stable
spam	non-descript, it was the likeliest thing upon the cards. So the guard
spam	of the Dover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one
spam	thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter's Hill, as
spam	he stood on his own particular perch behind the mail, beating his feet,
ham	and keeping an eye and a hand on the arm-chest before him, where a
spam	loaded blunderbuss lay at the top of six or eight loaded horse-pistols,
spam	deposited on a substratum of cutlass.
ham	The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard suspected
spam	the passengers, the passengers suspected one another and the guard, they
ham	all suspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of nothing but
spam	the horses; as to which cattle he could with a clear conscience have
ham	taken his oath on the two Testaments that they were not fit for the
spam	journey.
ham	"Wo-ho!" said the coachman. "So, then! One more pull and you're at the
spam	top and be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to get you to
spam	it!--Joe!"
spam	"Halloa!" the guard replied.
spam	"What o'clock do you make it, Joe?"
spam	"Ten minutes, good, past eleven."
spam	"My blood!" ejaculated the vexed coachman, "and not atop of Shooter's
spam	yet! Tst! Yah! Get on with you!"
spam	The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided negative,
ham	made a decided scramble for it, and the three other horses followed
spam	suit. Once more, the Dover mail struggled on, with the jack-boots of its
ham	passengers squashing along by its side. They had stopped when the coach
spam	stopped, and they kept close company with it. If any one of the three
spam	had had the hardihood to propose to another to walk on a little ahead
ham	into the mist and darkness, he would have put himself in a fair way of
ham	getting shot instantly as a highwayman.
ham	The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill. The horses
spam	stopped to breathe again, and the guard got down to skid the wheel for
spam	the descent, and open the coach-door to let the passengers in.
spam	"Tst! Joe!" cried the coachman in a warning voice, looking down from his
spam	box.
spam	"What do you say, Tom?"
ham	They both listened.
ham	"I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe."
ham	"_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned the guard, leaving his hold
ham	of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place. "Gentlemen! In the king's
ham	name, all of you!"
spam	With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and stood on
spam	the offensive.
ham	The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step, getting in;
spam	the two other passengers were close behind him, and about to follow. He
spam	remained on the step, half in the coach and half out of; they remained
ham	in the road below him. They all looked from the coachman to the guard,
spam	and from the guard to the coachman, and listened. The coachman looked
spam	back and the guard looked back, and even the emphatic leader pricked up
ham	his ears and looked back, without contradicting.
spam	The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and labouring
spam	of the coach, added to the stillness of the night, made it very quiet
ham	indeed. The panting of the horses communicated a tremulous motion to
ham	the coach, as if it were in a state of agitation. The hearts of the
spam	passengers beat loud enough perhaps to be heard; but at any rate, the
spam	quiet pause was audibly expressive of people out of breath, and holding
ham	the breath, and having the pulses quickened by expectation.
ham	The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up the hill.
spam	"So-ho!" the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar. "Yo there! Stand!
spam	I shall fire!"
spam	The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering,
ham	a man's voice called from the mist, "Is that the Dover mail?"
ham	"Never you mind what it is!" the guard retorted. "What are you?"
ham	"_Is_ that the Dover mail?"
ham	"Why do you want to know?"
ham	"I want a passenger, if it is."
ham	"What passenger?"
ham	"Mr. Jarvis Lorry."
ham	Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name. The guard,
spam	the coachman, and the two other passengers eyed him distrustfully.
spam	"Keep where you are," the guard called to the voice in the mist,
spam	"because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set right in
ham	your lifetime. Gentleman of the name of Lorry answer straight."
ham	"What is the matter?" asked the passenger, then, with mildly quavering
spam	speech. "Who wants me? Is it Jerry?"
ham	("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled the guard to
ham	himself. "He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")
spam	"Yes, Mr. Lorry."
ham	"What is the matter?"
ham	"A despatch sent after you from over yonder. T. and Co."
spam	"I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down into the
spam	road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the other two
spam	passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach, shut the door, and
ham	pulled up the window. "He may come close; there's nothing wrong."
ham	"I hope there ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that," said the
ham	guard, in gruff soliloquy. "Hallo you!"
ham	"Well! And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.
spam	"Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me? And if you've got holsters to that
ham	saddle o' yourn, don't let me see your hand go nigh 'em. For I'm a devil
ham	at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takes the form of Lead. So
spam	now let's look at you."
ham	The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying mist,
ham	and came to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood. The rider
spam	stooped, and, casting up his eyes at the guard, handed the passenger
spam	a small folded paper. The rider's horse was blown, and both horse and
spam	rider were covered with mud, from the hoofs of the horse to the hat of
ham	the man.
ham	"Guard!" said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.
spam	The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raised
spam	blunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman,
ham	answered curtly, "Sir."
spam	"There is nothing to apprehend. I belong to Tellson's Bank. You must
spam	know Tellson's Bank in London. I am going to Paris on business. A crown
spam	to drink. I may read this?"
ham	"If so be as you're quick, sir."
ham	He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side, and
spam	read--first to himself and then aloud: "'Wait at Dover for Mam'selle.'
ham	It's not long, you see, guard. Jerry, say that my answer was, RECALLED
spam	TO LIFE."
spam	Jerry started in his saddle. "That's a Blazing strange answer, too,"
ham	said he, at his hoarsest.
spam	"Take that message back, and they will know that I received this, as
spam	well as if I wrote. Make the best of your way. Good night."
ham	With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in; not at
ham	all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who had expeditiously secreted
spam	their watches and purses in their boots, and were now making a general
spam	pretence of being asleep. With no more definite purpose than to escape
spam	the hazard of originating any other kind of action.
ham	The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing round
spam	it as it began the descent. The guard soon replaced his blunderbuss
ham	in his arm-chest, and, having looked to the rest of its contents, and
spam	having looked to the supplementary pistols that he wore in his belt,
ham	looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in which there were a
spam	few smith's tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box. For he was
spam	furnished with that completeness that if the coach-lamps had been blown
spam	and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he had only to shut
spam	himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks well off the straw,
spam	and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he were lucky) in
ham	five minutes.
ham	"Tom!" softly over the coach roof.
spam	"Hallo, Joe."
ham	"Did you hear the message?"
spam	"I did, Joe."
spam	"What did you make of it, Tom?"
spam	"Nothing at all, Joe."
ham	"That's a coincidence, too," the guard mused, "for I made the same of it
ham	myself."
ham	Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile, not
ham	only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from his face, and
spam	shake the wet out of his hat-brim, which might be capable of
spam	holding about half a gallon. After standing with the bridle over his
spam	heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of the mail were no longer within
ham	hearing and the night was quite still again, he turned to walk down the
ham	hill.
spam	"After that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trust your
spam	fore-legs till I get you on the level," said this hoarse messenger,
ham	glancing at his mare. "'Recalled to life.' That's a Blazing strange
spam	message. Much of that wouldn't do for you, Jerry! I say, Jerry! You'd
ham	be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to life was to come into fashion,
spam	Jerry!"
ham	III. The Night Shadows
spam	A wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature is
spam	constituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every other. A
spam	solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, that every
spam	one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret; that every
ham	room in every one of them encloses its own secret; that every beating
ham	heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there, is, in some of
spam	its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it! Something of the
spam	awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to this. No more can I
ham	turn the leaves of this dear book that I loved, and vainly hope in time
spam	to read it all. No more can I look into the depths of this unfathomable
ham	water, wherein, as momentary lights glanced into it, I have had glimpses
ham	of buried treasure and other things submerged. It was appointed that the
spam	book should shut with a spring, for ever and for ever, when I had read
spam	but a page. It was appointed that the water should be locked in an
ham	eternal frost, when the light was playing on its surface, and I stood
spam	in ignorance on the shore. My friend is dead, my neighbour is dead,
ham	my love, the darling of my soul, is dead; it is the inexorable
ham	consolidation and perpetuation of the secret that was always in that
ham	individuality, and which I shall carry in mine to my life's end. In
spam	any of the burial-places of this city through which I pass, is there
spam	a sleeper more inscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in their
ham	innermost personality, to me, or than I am to them?
spam	As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance, the
ham	messenger on horseback had exactly the same possessions as the King, the
spam	first Minister of State, or the richest merchant in London. So with the
ham	three passengers shut up in the narrow compass of one lumbering old mail
ham	coach; they were mysteries to one another, as complete as if each had
spam	been in his own coach and six, or his own coach and sixty, with the
ham	breadth of a county between him and the next.
spam	The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at
ham	ale-houses by the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his
spam	own counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes. He had eyes that
spam	assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surface black, with
spam	no depth in the colour or form, and much too near together--as if they
spam	were afraid of being found out in something, singly, if they kept too
ham	far apart. They had a sinister expression, under an old cocked-hat like
ham	a three-cornered spittoon, and over a great muffler for the chin and
spam	throat, which descended nearly to the wearer's knees. When he stopped
ham	for drink, he moved this muffler with his left hand, only while he
spam	poured his liquor in with his right; as soon as that was done, he
ham	muffled again.
spam	"No, Jerry, no!" said the messenger, harping on one theme as he rode.
spam	"It wouldn't do for you, Jerry. Jerry, you honest tradesman, it wouldn't
spam	suit _your_ line of business! Recalled--! Bust me if I don't think he'd
ham	been a drinking!"
spam	His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain, several
ham	times, to take off his hat to scratch his head. Except on the crown,
ham	which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair, standing jaggedly all
ham	over it, and growing down hill almost to his broad, blunt nose. It was
spam	so like Smith's work, so much more like the top of a strongly spiked
spam	wall than a head of hair, that the best of players at leap-frog might
ham	have declined him, as the most dangerous man in the world to go over.
spam	While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the night
ham	watchman in his box at the door of Tellson's Bank, by Temple Bar, who
spam	was to deliver it to greater authorities within, the shadows of the
ham	night took such shapes to him as arose out of the message, and took such
spam	shapes to the mare as arose out of _her_ private topics of uneasiness.
ham	They seemed to be numerous, for she shied at every shadow on the road.
ham	What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon
ham	its tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside. To whom,
spam	likewise, the shadows of the night revealed themselves, in the forms
ham	their dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested.
ham	Tellson's Bank had a run upon it in the mail. As the bank
ham	passenger--with an arm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what
spam	lay in it to keep him from pounding against the next passenger,
spam	and driving him into his corner, whenever the coach got a special
ham	jolt--nodded in his place, with half-shut eyes, the little
ham	coach-windows, and the coach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and the
ham	bulky bundle of opposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great
ham	stroke of business. The rattle of the harness was the chink of money,
spam	and more drafts were honoured in five minutes than even Tellson's, with
ham	all its foreign and home connection, ever paid in thrice the time. Then
spam	the strong-rooms underground, at Tellson's, with such of their valuable
spam	stores and secrets as were known to the passenger (and it was not a
ham	little that he knew about them), opened before him, and he went in among
spam	them with the great keys and the feebly-burning candle, and found them
ham	safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he had last seen them.
spam	But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the coach
spam	(in a confused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate) was
ham	always with him, there was another current of impression that never
ham	ceased to run, all through the night. He was on his way to dig some one
ham	out of a grave.
ham	Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves before him
spam	was the true face of the buried person, the shadows of the night did
spam	not indicate; but they were all the faces of a man of five-and-forty by
spam	years, and they differed principally in the passions they expressed,
spam	and in the ghastliness of their worn and wasted state. Pride, contempt,
spam	defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation, succeeded one another;
ham	so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverous colour, emaciated hands
ham	and figures. But the face was in the main one face, and every head was
spam	prematurely white. A hundred times the dozing passenger inquired of this
ham	spectre:
spam	"Buried how long?"
spam	The answer was always the same: "Almost eighteen years."
ham	"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"
ham	"Long ago."
spam	"You know that you are recalled to life?"
ham	"They tell me so."
ham	"I hope you care to live?"
spam	"I can't say."
spam	"Shall I show her to you? Will you come and see her?"
spam	The answers to this question were various and contradictory. Sometimes
ham	the broken reply was, "Wait! It would kill me if I saw her too soon."
ham	Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears, and then it was,
spam	"Take me to her." Sometimes it was staring and bewildered, and then it
ham	was, "I don't know her. I don't understand."
ham	After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would dig,
spam	and dig, dig--now with a spade, now with a great key, now with his
spam	hands--to dig this wretched creature out. Got out at last, with earth
ham	hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fan away to dust. The
spam	passenger would then start to himself, and lower the window, to get the
spam	reality of mist and rain on his cheek.
ham	Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on the moving
ham	patch of light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadside retreating
ham	by jerks, the night shadows outside the coach would fall into the train
spam	of the night shadows within. The real Banking-house by Temple Bar, the
ham	real business of the past day, the real strong rooms, the real express
spam	sent after him, and the real message returned, would all be there. Out
spam	of the midst of them, the ghostly face would rise, and he would accost
spam	it again.
ham	"Buried how long?"
ham	"Almost eighteen years."
ham	"I hope you care to live?"
ham	"I can't say."
ham	Dig--dig--dig--until an impatient movement from one of the two
ham	passengers would admonish him to pull up the window, draw his arm
spam	securely through the leathern strap, and speculate upon the two
ham	slumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of them, and they again
spam	slid away into the bank and the grave.
spam	"Buried how long?"
spam	"Almost eighteen years."
ham	"You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?"
ham	"Long ago."
spam	The words were still in his hearing as just spoken--distinctly in
ham	his hearing as ever spoken words had been in his life--when the weary
ham	passenger started to the consciousness of daylight, and found that the
ham	shadows of the night were gone.
spam	He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun. There was a
ham	ridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left
ham	last night when the horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood,
ham	in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remained
spam	upon the trees. Though the earth was cold and wet, the sky was clear,
spam	and the sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful.
spam	"Eighteen years!" said the passenger, looking at the sun. "Gracious
spam	Creator of day! To be buried alive for eighteen years!"
spam	IV. The Preparation
spam	When the mail got successfully to Dover, in the course of the forenoon,
ham	the head drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened the coach-door as his
spam	custom was. He did it with some flourish of ceremony, for a mail journey
spam	from London in winter was an achievement to congratulate an adventurous
spam	traveller upon.
ham	By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left be
ham	congratulated: for the two others had been set down at their respective
spam	roadside destinations. The mildewy inside of the coach, with its damp
spam	and dirty straw, its disagreeable smell, and its obscurity, was rather
ham	like a larger dog-kennel. Mr. Lorry, the passenger, shaking himself out
spam	of it in chains of straw, a tangle of shaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and
spam	muddy legs, was rather like a larger sort of dog.
ham	"There will be a packet to Calais, tomorrow, drawer?"
spam	"Yes, sir, if the weather holds and the wind sets tolerable fair. The
ham	tide will serve pretty nicely at about two in the afternoon, sir. Bed,
ham	sir?"
spam	"I shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a barber."
ham	"And then breakfast, sir? Yes, sir. That way, sir, if you please.
spam	Show Concord! Gentleman's valise and hot water to Concord. Pull off
ham	gentleman's boots in Concord. (You will find a fine sea-coal fire, sir.)
ham	Fetch barber to Concord. Stir about there, now, for Concord!"
ham	The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by the
ham	mail, and passengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up from
ham	head to foot, the room had the odd interest for the establishment of the
spam	Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to go into it,
ham	all kinds and varieties of men came out of it. Consequently, another
ham	drawer, and two porters, and several maids and the landlady, were all
ham	loitering by accident at various points of the road between the Concord
ham	and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty, formally dressed in a
ham	brown suit of clothes, pretty well worn, but very well kept, with large
ham	square cuffs and large flaps to the pockets, passed along on his way to
ham	his breakfast.
ham	The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than the gentleman
ham	in brown. His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire, and as he sat,
spam	with its light shining on him, waiting for the meal, he sat so still,
ham	that he might have been sitting for his portrait.
spam	Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and a
ham	loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat,
spam	as though it pitted its gravity and longevity against the levity and
ham	evanescence of the brisk fire. He had a good leg, and was a little vain
ham	of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and were of a
spam	fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, were trim. He
spam	wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting very close to his
ham	head: which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair, but which
spam	looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of silk or glass.
spam	His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance with his stockings,
ham	was as white as the tops of the waves that broke upon the neighbouring
ham	beach, or the specks of sail that glinted in the sunlight far at sea. A
spam	face habitually suppressed and quieted, was still lighted up under the
ham	quaint wig by a pair of moist bright eyes that it must have cost
spam	their owner, in years gone by, some pains to drill to the composed and
ham	reserved expression of Tellson's Bank. He had a healthy colour in his
spam	cheeks, and his face, though lined, bore few traces of anxiety.
spam	But, perhaps the confidential bachelor clerks in Tellson's Bank were
spam	principally occupied with the cares of other people; and perhaps
ham	second-hand cares, like second-hand clothes, come easily off and on.
spam	Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait,
ham	Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep. The arrival of his breakfast roused him,
ham	and he said to the drawer, as he moved his chair to it:
ham	"I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at any
ham	time to-day. She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only ask for a
ham	gentleman from Tellson's Bank. Please to let me know."
spam	"Yes, sir. Tellson's Bank in London, sir?"
ham	"Yes."
ham	"Yes, sir. We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemen in
spam	their travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris, sir. A
spam	vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company's House."
ham	"Yes. We are quite a French House, as well as an English one."
spam	"Yes, sir. Not much in the habit of such travelling yourself, I think,
ham	sir?"
spam	"Not of late years. It is fifteen years since we--since I--came last
spam	from France."
ham	"Indeed, sir? That was before my time here, sir. Before our people's
ham	time here, sir. The George was in other hands at that time, sir."
spam	"I believe so."
ham	"But I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson and
spam	Company was flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteen
ham	years ago?"
spam	"You might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be far from
ham	the truth."
ham	"Indeed, sir!"
spam	Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from the
ham	table, the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left,
ham	dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying the guest while
spam	he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower. According to the
ham	immemorial usage of waiters in all ages.
spam	When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a stroll on
ham	the beach. The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itself away
spam	from the beach, and ran its head into the chalk cliffs, like a marine
ham	ostrich. The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and stones tumbling
ham	wildly about, and the sea did what it liked, and what it liked was
ham	destruction. It thundered at the town, and thundered at the cliffs, and
ham	brought the coast down, madly. The air among the houses was of so strong
spam	a piscatory flavour that one might have supposed sick fish went up to be
ham	dipped in it, as sick people went down to be dipped in the sea. A little
spam	fishing was done in the port, and a quantity of strolling about by
spam	night, and looking seaward: particularly at those times when the tide
ham	made, and was near flood. Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever,
ham	sometimes unaccountably realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable
ham	that nobody in the neighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.
spam	As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had been
spam	at intervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen, became
spam	again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry's thoughts seemed to cloud
spam	too. When it was dark, and he sat before the coffee-room fire, awaiting
ham	his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast, his mind was busily digging,
ham	digging, digging, in the live red coals.
ham	A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red coals no
spam	harm, otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of work.
ham	Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured out his last
ham	glassful of wine with as complete an appearance of satisfaction as is
spam	ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of a fresh complexion who has
spam	got to the end of a bottle, when a rattling of wheels came up the narrow
spam	street, and rumbled into the inn-yard.
spam	He set down his glass untouched. "This is Mam'selle!" said he.
spam	In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that Miss Manette
ham	had arrived from London, and would be happy to see the gentleman from
ham	Tellson's.
spam	"So soon?"
ham	Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and required none
spam	then, and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman from Tellson's
spam	immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience.
ham	The gentleman from Tellson's had nothing left for it but to empty his
spam	glass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxen
spam	wig at the ears, and follow the waiter to Miss Manette's apartment.
ham	It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner with black
spam	horsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables. These had been oiled and
spam	oiled, until the two tall candles on the table in the middle of the room
spam	were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if _they_ were buried, in deep
spam	graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak of could be expected
spam	from them until they were dug out.
spam	The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry, picking his
ham	way over the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed Miss Manette to be, for
ham	the moment, in some adjacent room, until, having got past the two tall
ham	candles, he saw standing to receive him by the table between them and
ham	the fire, a young lady of not more than seventeen, in a riding-cloak,
ham	and still holding her straw travelling-hat by its ribbon in her hand. As
ham	his eyes rested on a short, slight, pretty figure, a quantity of golden
ham	hair, a pair of blue eyes that met his own with an inquiring look, and
ham	a forehead with a singular capacity (remembering how young and smooth
ham	it was), of rifting and knitting itself into an expression that was
ham	not quite one of perplexity, or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright
spam	fixed attention, though it included all the four expressions--as his
spam	eyes rested on these things, a sudden vivid likeness passed before him,
ham	of a child whom he had held in his arms on the passage across that very
spam	Channel, one cold time, when the hail drifted heavily and the sea ran
spam	high. The likeness passed away, like a breath along the surface of
spam	the gaunt pier-glass behind her, on the frame of which, a hospital
ham	procession of negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were
ham	offering black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of the
spam	feminine gender--and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.
ham	"Pray take a seat, sir." In a very clear and pleasant young voice; a
ham	little foreign in its accent, but a very little indeed.
spam	"I kiss your hand, miss," said Mr. Lorry, with the manners of an earlier
ham	date, as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat.
spam	"I received a letter from the Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me that
ham	some intelligence--or discovery--"
spam	"The word is not material, miss; either word will do."
ham	"--respecting the small property of my poor father, whom I never saw--so
spam	long dead--"
spam	Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards the
ham	hospital procession of negro cupids. As if _they_ had any help for
spam	anybody in their absurd baskets!
ham	"--rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there to communicate
ham	with a gentleman of the Bank, so good as to be despatched to Paris for
spam	the purpose."
spam	"Myself."
ham	"As I was prepared to hear, sir."
ham	She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), with a
spam	pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older and wiser he
spam	was than she. He made her another bow.
spam	"I replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by
ham	those who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should go to
spam	France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who could go with
ham	me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to place myself,
spam	during the journey, under that worthy gentleman's protection. The
spam	gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was sent after him to
ham	beg the favour of his waiting for me here."
ham	"I was happy," said Mr. Lorry, "to be entrusted with the charge. I shall
ham	be more happy to execute it."
spam	"Sir, I thank you indeed. I thank you very gratefully. It was told me
spam	by the Bank that the gentleman would explain to me the details of the
ham	business, and that I must prepare myself to find them of a surprising
ham	nature. I have done my best to prepare myself, and I naturally have a
spam	strong and eager interest to know what they are."
ham	"Naturally," said Mr. Lorry. "Yes--I--"
spam	After a pause, he added, again settling the crisp flaxen wig at the
ham	ears, "It is very difficult to begin."
ham	He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance. The young
ham	forehead lifted itself into that singular expression--but it was pretty
spam	and characteristic, besides being singular--and she raised her hand,
ham	as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayed some passing
ham	shadow.
ham	"Are you quite a stranger to me, sir?"
spam	"Am I not?" Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended them outwards with
ham	an argumentative smile.
spam	Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the line of
ham	which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, the expression
spam	deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in the chair by which
ham	she had hitherto remained standing. He watched her as she mused, and the
spam	moment she raised her eyes again, went on:
ham	"In your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than address you
spam	as a young English lady, Miss Manette?"
spam	"If you please, sir."
ham	"Miss Manette, I am a man of business. I have a business charge to
spam	acquit myself of. In your reception of it, don't heed me any more than
spam	if I was a speaking machine--truly, I am not much else. I will, with
spam	your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one of our customers."
spam	"Story!"
ham	He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when he added,
ham	in a hurry, "Yes, customers; in the banking business we usually call
spam	our connection our customers. He was a French gentleman; a scientific
spam	gentleman; a man of great acquirements--a Doctor."
ham	"Not of Beauvais?"
ham	"Why, yes, of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the
spam	gentleman was of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the
spam	gentleman was of repute in Paris. I had the honour of knowing him there.
spam	Our relations were business relations, but confidential. I was at that
spam	time in our French House, and had been--oh! twenty years."
ham	"At that time--I may ask, at what time, sir?"
ham	"I speak, miss, of twenty years ago. He married--an English lady--and
ham	I was one of the trustees. His affairs, like the affairs of many other
ham	French gentlemen and French families, were entirely in Tellson's hands.
spam	In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee of one kind or other for
ham	scores of our customers. These are mere business relations, miss;
ham	there is no friendship in them, no particular interest, nothing like
spam	sentiment. I have passed from one to another, in the course of my
ham	business life, just as I pass from one of our customers to another in
spam	the course of my business day; in short, I have no feelings; I am a mere
ham	machine. To go on--"
spam	"But this is my father's story, sir; and I begin to think"--the
ham	curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him--"that when I was
ham	left an orphan through my mother's surviving my father only two years,
ham	it was you who brought me to England. I am almost sure it was you."
ham	Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly advanced
ham	to take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips. He then
spam	conducted the young lady straightway to her chair again, and, holding
ham	the chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by turns to rub
spam	his chin, pull his wig at the ears, or point what he said, stood looking
spam	down into her face while she sat looking up into his.
spam	"Miss Manette, it _was_ I. And you will see how truly I spoke of myself
spam	just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all the relations I hold
ham	with my fellow-creatures are mere business relations, when you reflect
ham	that I have never seen you since. No; you have been the ward of
spam	Tellson's House since, and I have been busy with the other business of
ham	Tellson's House since. Feelings! I have no time for them, no chance
ham	of them. I pass my whole life, miss, in turning an immense pecuniary
ham	Mangle."
ham	After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr. Lorry
ham	flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which was most
ham	unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining surface was
spam	before), and resumed his former attitude.
ham	"So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of your
spam	regretted father. Now comes the difference. If your father had not died
ham	when he did--Don't be frightened! How you start!"
ham	She did, indeed, start. And she caught his wrist with both her hands.
spam	"Pray," said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand from
spam	the back of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers that clasped
spam	him in so violent a tremble: "pray control your agitation--a matter of
ham	business. As I was saying--"
spam	Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began anew:
ham	"As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had suddenly
spam	and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away; if it had not
ham	been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, though no art could
ham	trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot who could exercise a
spam	privilege that I in my own time have known the boldest people afraid
ham	to speak of in a whisper, across the water there; for instance, the
ham	privilege of filling up blank forms for the consignment of any one
ham	to the oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if his wife had
spam	implored the king, the queen, the court, the clergy, for any tidings of
ham	him, and all quite in vain;--then the history of your father would have
ham	been the history of this unfortunate gentleman, the Doctor of Beauvais."
ham	"I entreat you to tell me more, sir."
spam	"I will. I am going to. You can bear it?"
ham	"I can bear anything but the uncertainty you leave me in at this
spam	moment."
ham	"You speak collectedly, and you--_are_ collected. That's good!" (Though
ham	his manner was less satisfied than his words.) "A matter of business.
ham	Regard it as a matter of business--business that must be done. Now
spam	if this doctor's wife, though a lady of great courage and spirit,
ham	had suffered so intensely from this cause before her little child was
ham	born--"
spam	"The little child was a daughter, sir."
spam	"A daughter. A-a-matter of business--don't be distressed. Miss, if the
spam	poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little child was born,
ham	that she came to the determination of sparing the poor child the
spam	inheritance of any part of the agony she had known the pains of, by
ham	rearing her in the belief that her father was dead--No, don't kneel! In
ham	Heaven's name why should you kneel to me!"
ham	"For the truth. O dear, good, compassionate sir, for the truth!"
spam	"A--a matter of business. You confuse me, and how can I transact
ham	business if I am confused? Let us be clear-headed. If you could kindly
ham	mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are, or how many
ham	shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging. I should be so
spam	much more at my ease about your state of mind."
ham	Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when he had
ham	very gently raised her, and the hands that had not ceased to clasp
ham	his wrists were so much more steady than they had been, that she
spam	communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry.
spam	"That's right, that's right. Courage! Business! You have business before
ham	you; useful business. Miss Manette, your mother took this course with
ham	you. And when she died--I believe broken-hearted--having never slackened
ham	her unavailing search for your father, she left you, at two years old,
ham	to grow to be blooming, beautiful, and happy, without the dark cloud
spam	upon you of living in uncertainty whether your father soon wore his
ham	heart out in prison, or wasted there through many lingering years."
ham	As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on the
ham	flowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have
ham	been already tinged with grey.
spam	"You know that your parents had no great possession, and that what
spam	they had was secured to your mother and to you. There has been no new
ham	discovery, of money, or of any other property; but--"
ham	He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped. The expression in the
spam	forehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which was
spam	now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror.
spam	"But he has been--been found. He is alive. Greatly changed, it is too
ham	probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope the best.
spam	Still, alive. Your father has been taken to the house of an old servant
spam	in Paris, and we are going there: I, to identify him if I can: you, to
ham	restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort."
spam	A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his. She said, in a
ham	low, distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in a dream,
ham	"I am going to see his Ghost! It will be his Ghost--not him!"
spam	Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm. "There, there,
spam	there! See now, see now! The best and the worst are known to you, now.
spam	You are well on your way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fair
ham	sea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear side."
ham	She repeated in the same tone, sunk to a whisper, "I have been free, I
ham	have been happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!"
spam	"Only one thing more," said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a
spam	wholesome means of enforcing her attention: "he has been found under
spam	another name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed. It would be
spam	worse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seek to
spam	know whether he has been for years overlooked, or always designedly
spam	held prisoner. It would be worse than useless now to make any inquiries,
spam	because it would be dangerous. Better not to mention the subject,
ham	anywhere or in any way, and to remove him--for a while at all
ham	events--out of France. Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even
ham	Tellson's, important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of
ham	the matter. I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly referring
ham	to it. This is a secret service altogether. My credentials, entries,
ham	and memoranda, are all comprehended in the one line, 'Recalled to Life;'
ham	which may mean anything. But what is the matter! She doesn't notice a
ham	word! Miss Manette!"
ham	Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair, she
spam	sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and fixed
spam	upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it were carved or
spam	branded into her forehead. So close was her hold upon his arm, that he
ham	feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her; therefore he called
ham	out loudly for assistance without moving.
spam	A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed to
ham	be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed in some
ham	extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a most
spam	wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and good measure too,
spam	or a great Stilton cheese, came running into the room in advance of the
ham	inn servants, and soon settled the question of his detachment from the
ham	poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon his chest, and sending him
spam	flying back against the nearest wall.
ham	("I really think this must be a man!" was Mr. Lorry's breathless
ham	reflection, simultaneously with his coming against the wall.)
ham	"Why, look at you all!" bawled this figure, addressing the inn servants.
spam	"Why don't you go and fetch things, instead of standing there staring
ham	at me? I am not so much to look at, am I? Why don't you go and fetch
ham	things? I'll let you know, if you don't bring smelling-salts, cold
spam	water, and vinegar, quick, I will."
ham	There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and she
ham	softly laid the patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill and
spam	gentleness: calling her "my precious!" and "my bird!" and spreading her
spam	golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care.
spam	"And you in brown!" she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry;
ham	"couldn't you tell her what you had to tell her, without frightening her
spam	to death? Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold hands. Do
spam	you call _that_ being a Banker?"
ham	Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to
ham	answer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler
spam	sympathy and humility, while the strong woman, having banished the inn
spam	servants under the mysterious penalty of "letting them know" something
ham	not mentioned if they stayed there, staring, recovered her charge by a
spam	regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay her drooping head
ham	upon her shoulder.
spam	"I hope she will do well now," said Mr. Lorry.
ham	"No thanks to you in brown, if she does. My darling pretty!"
spam	"I hope," said Mr. Lorry, after another pause of feeble sympathy and
ham	humility, "that you accompany Miss Manette to France?"
ham	"A likely thing, too!" replied the strong woman. "If it was ever
spam	intended that I should go across salt water, do you suppose Providence
ham	would have cast my lot in an island?"
ham	This being another question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry withdrew to
spam	consider it.
ham	V. The Wine-shop
spam	A large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street. The
ham	accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask had tumbled
spam	out with a run, the hoops had burst, and it lay on the stones just
spam	outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like a walnut-shell.
ham	All the people within reach had suspended their business, or their
spam	idleness, to run to the spot and drink the wine. The rough, irregular
ham	stones of the street, pointing every way, and designed, one might have
spam	thought, expressly to lame all living creatures that approached them,
ham	had dammed it into little pools; these were surrounded, each by its own
ham	jostling group or crowd, according to its size. Some men kneeled down,
spam	made scoops of their two hands joined, and sipped, or tried to help
ham	women, who bent over their shoulders, to sip, before the wine had all
spam	run out between their fingers. Others, men and women, dipped in
ham	the puddles with little mugs of mutilated earthenware, or even with
ham	handkerchiefs from women's heads, which were squeezed dry into infants'
ham	mouths; others made small mud-embankments, to stem the wine as it ran;
spam	others, directed by lookers-on up at high windows, darted here and
ham	there, to cut off little streams of wine that started away in new
spam	directions; others devoted themselves to the sodden and lee-dyed
spam	pieces of the cask, licking, and even champing the moister wine-rotted
ham	fragments with eager relish. There was no drainage to carry off the
ham	wine, and not only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up
spam	along with it, that there might have been a scavenger in the street,
spam	if anybody acquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous
ham	presence.
ham	A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices--voices of men, women,
spam	and children--resounded in the street while this wine game lasted. There
spam	was little roughness in the sport, and much playfulness. There was a
ham	special companionship in it, an observable inclination on the part
spam	of every one to join some other one, which led, especially among the
ham	luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces, drinking of healths,
spam	shaking of hands, and even joining of hands and dancing, a dozen
ham	together. When the wine was gone, and the places where it had been
spam	most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by fingers, these
spam	demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had broken out. The man who
spam	had left his saw sticking in the firewood he was cutting, set it in
ham	motion again; the women who had left on a door-step the little pot of
ham	hot ashes, at which she had been trying to soften the pain in her own
ham	starved fingers and toes, or in those of her child, returned to it; men
spam	with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverous faces, who had emerged into
ham	the winter light from cellars, moved away, to descend again; and a gloom
spam	gathered on the scene that appeared more natural to it than sunshine.
ham	The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrow street
ham	in the suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was spilled. It had
ham	stained many hands, too, and many faces, and many naked feet, and many
spam	wooden shoes. The hands of the man who sawed the wood, left red marks
spam	on the billets; and the forehead of the woman who nursed her baby, was
spam	stained with the stain of the old rag she wound about her head again.
ham	Those who had been greedy with the staves of the cask, had acquired a
spam	tigerish smear about the mouth; and one tall joker so besmirched, his
spam	head more out of a long squalid bag of a nightcap than in it, scrawled
ham	upon a wall with his finger dipped in muddy wine-lees--BLOOD.
spam	The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on the
ham	street-stones, and when the stain of it would be red upon many there.
ham	And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary
ham	gleam had driven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it was
ham	heavy--cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords in
ham	waiting on the saintly presence--nobles of great power all of them;
ham	but, most especially the last. Samples of a people that had undergone a
ham	terrible grinding and regrinding in the mill, and certainly not in the
spam	fabulous mill which ground old people young, shivered at every corner,
spam	passed in and out at every doorway, looked from every window, fluttered
ham	in every vestige of a garment that the wind shook. The mill which
ham	had worked them down, was the mill that grinds young people old; the
spam	children had ancient faces and grave voices; and upon them, and upon the
spam	grown faces, and ploughed into every furrow of age and coming up afresh,
ham	was the sigh, Hunger. It was prevalent everywhere. Hunger was pushed out
spam	of the tall houses, in the wretched clothing that hung upon poles and
ham	lines; Hunger was patched into them with straw and rag and wood and
ham	paper; Hunger was repeated in every fragment of the small modicum of
ham	firewood that the man sawed off; Hunger stared down from the smokeless
spam	chimneys, and started up from the filthy street that had no offal,
ham	among its refuse, of anything to eat. Hunger was the inscription on the
ham	baker's shelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of
ham	bad bread; at the sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that
ham	was offered for sale. Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roasting
ham	chestnuts in the turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics in every
ham	farthing porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with some reluctant
ham	drops of oil.
ham	Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it. A narrow winding
ham	street, full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding streets
ham	diverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling of rags
ham	and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look upon them
spam	that looked ill. In the hunted air of the people there was yet some
ham	wild-beast thought of the possibility of turning at bay. Depressed and
ham	slinking though they were, eyes of fire were not wanting among them; nor
spam	compressed lips, white with what they suppressed; nor foreheads knitted
ham	into the likeness of the gallows-rope they mused about enduring, or
spam	inflicting. The trade signs (and they were almost as many as the shops)
spam	were, all, grim illustrations of Want. The butcher and the porkman
spam	painted up, only the leanest scrags of meat; the baker, the coarsest of
spam	meagre loaves. The people rudely pictured as drinking in the wine-shops,
ham	croaked over their scanty measures of thin wine and beer, and were
spam	gloweringly confidential together. Nothing was represented in a
spam	flourishing condition, save tools and weapons; but, the cutler's knives
ham	and axes were sharp and bright, the smith's hammers were heavy, and the
ham	gunmaker's stock was murderous. The crippling stones of the pavement,
spam	with their many little reservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but
spam	broke off abruptly at the doors. The kennel, to make amends, ran down
ham	the middle of the street--when it ran at all: which was only after heavy
ham	rains, and then it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses. Across
spam	the streets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and
spam	pulley; at night, when the lamplighter had let these down, and lighted,
spam	and hoisted them again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sickly
spam	manner overhead, as if they were at sea. Indeed they were at sea, and
ham	the ship and crew were in peril of tempest.
ham	For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that region
ham	should have watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and hunger, so
spam	long, as to conceive the idea of improving on his method, and hauling
spam	up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon the darkness of their
spam	condition. But, the time was not come yet; and every wind that blew over
spam	France shook the rags of the scarecrows in vain, for the birds, fine of
ham	song and feather, took no warning.
ham	The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in its
ham	appearance and degree, and the master of the wine-shop had stood outside
spam	it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on at the struggle
spam	for the lost wine. "It's not my affair," said he, with a final shrug
spam	of the shoulders. "The people from the market did it. Let them bring
spam	another."
ham	There, his eyes happening to catch the tall joker writing up his joke,
ham	he called to him across the way:
ham	"Say, then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?"
ham	The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is often
ham	the way with his tribe. It missed its mark, and completely failed, as is
ham	often the way with his tribe too.
spam	"What now? Are you a subject for the mad hospital?" said the wine-shop
spam	keeper, crossing the road, and obliterating the jest with a handful of
spam	mud, picked up for the purpose, and smeared over it. "Why do you write
ham	in the public streets? Is there--tell me thou--is there no other place
ham	to write such words in?"
spam	In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally,
ham	perhaps not) upon the joker's heart. The joker rapped it with his
ham	own, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a fantastic dancing
spam	attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off his foot into his
ham	hand, and held out. A joker of an extremely, not to say wolfishly
spam	practical character, he looked, under those circumstances.
spam	"Put it on, put it on," said the other. "Call wine, wine; and finish
ham	there." With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the joker's
spam	dress, such as it was--quite deliberately, as having dirtied the hand on
ham	his account; and then recrossed the road and entered the wine-shop.
spam	This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of thirty,
spam	and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, although it was a
ham	bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over his shoulder.
spam	His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown arms were bare to
spam	the elbows. Neither did he wear anything more on his head than his own
ham	crisply-curling short dark hair. He was a dark man altogether, with good
ham	eyes and a good bold breadth between them. Good-humoured looking on
ham	the whole, but implacable-looking, too; evidently a man of a strong
spam	resolution and a set purpose; a man not desirable to be met, rushing
ham	down a narrow pass with a gulf on either side, for nothing would turn
spam	the man.
ham	Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as he
spam	came in. Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with
spam	a watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand
spam	heavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composure of
spam	manner. There was a character about Madame Defarge, from which one might
spam	have predicated that she did not often make mistakes against herself
ham	in any of the reckonings over which she presided. Madame Defarge being
spam	sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a quantity of bright
ham	shawl twined about her head, though not to the concealment of her large
spam	earrings. Her knitting was before her, but she had laid it down to pick
ham	her teeth with a toothpick. Thus engaged, with her right elbow supported
ham	by her left hand, Madame Defarge said nothing when her lord came in, but
spam	coughed just one grain of cough. This, in combination with the lifting
spam	of her darkly defined eyebrows over her toothpick by the breadth of a
ham	line, suggested to her husband that he would do well to look round the
spam	shop among the customers, for any new customer who had dropped in while
spam	he stepped over the way.
ham	The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until they
ham	rested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated in
ham	a corner. Other company were there: two playing cards, two playing
ham	dominoes, three standing by the counter lengthening out a short supply
ham	of wine. As he passed behind the counter, he took notice that the
ham	elderly gentleman said in a look to the young lady, "This is our man."
ham	"What the devil do _you_ do in that galley there?" said Monsieur Defarge
ham	to himself; "I don't know you."
ham	But, he feigned not to notice the two strangers, and fell into discourse
spam	with the triumvirate of customers who were drinking at the counter.
spam	"How goes it, Jacques?" said one of these three to Monsieur Defarge. "Is
spam	all the spilt wine swallowed?"
ham	"Every drop, Jacques," answered Monsieur Defarge.
spam	When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge,
spam	picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain of cough,
ham	and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.
spam	"It is not often," said the second of the three, addressing Monsieur
ham	Defarge, "that many of these miserable beasts know the taste of wine, or
ham	of anything but black bread and death. Is it not so, Jacques?"
ham	"It is so, Jacques," Monsieur Defarge returned.
ham	At this second interchange of the Christian name, Madame Defarge, still
spam	using her toothpick with profound composure, coughed another grain of
spam	cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.
spam	The last of the three now said his say, as he put down his empty
spam	drinking vessel and smacked his lips.
ham	"Ah! So much the worse! A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle
spam	always have in their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques. Am I
ham	right, Jacques?"
spam	"You are right, Jacques," was the response of Monsieur Defarge.
ham	This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at the moment
ham	when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows up, and
spam	slightly rustled in her seat.
spam	"Hold then! True!" muttered her husband. "Gentlemen--my wife!"
spam	The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, with three
ham	flourishes. She acknowledged their homage by bending her head, and
spam	giving them a quick look. Then she glanced in a casual manner round the
spam	wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparent calmness and repose
ham	of spirit, and became absorbed in it.
ham	"Gentlemen," said her husband, who had kept his bright eye observantly
spam	upon her, "good day. The chamber, furnished bachelor-fashion, that you
ham	wished to see, and were inquiring for when I stepped out, is on the
ham	fifth floor. The doorway of the staircase gives on the little courtyard
ham	close to the left here," pointing with his hand, "near to the window of
spam	my establishment. But, now that I remember, one of you has already been
ham	there, and can show the way. Gentlemen, adieu!"
ham	They paid for their wine, and left the place. The eyes of Monsieur
ham	Defarge were studying his wife at her knitting when the elderly
spam	gentleman advanced from his corner, and begged the favour of a word.
ham	"Willingly, sir," said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with him to
spam	the door.
ham	Their conference was very short, but very decided. Almost at the first
ham	word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive. It had
spam	not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out. The gentleman then
spam	beckoned to the young lady, and they, too, went out. Madame Defarge
spam	knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, and saw nothing.
spam	Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus,
ham	joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed his own
ham	company just before. It opened from a stinking little black courtyard,
spam	and was the general public entrance to a great pile of houses, inhabited
ham	by a great number of people. In the gloomy tile-paved entry to the
spam	gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur Defarge bent down on one knee
spam	to the child of his old master, and put her hand to his lips. It was
ham	a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a very remarkable
spam	transformation had come over him in a few seconds. He had no good-humour
ham	in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but had become a secret,
spam	angry, dangerous man.
ham	"It is very high; it is a little difficult. Better to begin slowly."
spam	Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they began
ham	ascending the stairs.
ham	"Is he alone?" the latter whispered.
ham	"Alone! God help him, who should be with him!" said the other, in the
ham	same low voice.
spam	"Is he always alone, then?"
spam	"Yes."
ham	"Of his own desire?"
ham	"Of his own necessity. As he was, when I first saw him after they
ham	found me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril be
spam	discreet--as he was then, so he is now."
ham	"He is greatly changed?"
spam	"Changed!"
ham	The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his hand,
ham	and mutter a tremendous curse. No direct answer could have been half so
spam	forcible. Mr. Lorry's spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he and his
spam	two companions ascended higher and higher.
ham	Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more crowded
ham	parts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it was vile
ham	indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses. Every little habitation
ham	within the great foul nest of one high building--that is to say,
ham	the room or rooms within every door that opened on the general
spam	staircase--left its own heap of refuse on its own landing, besides
spam	flinging other refuse from its own windows. The uncontrollable and
ham	hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted
spam	the air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with their
spam	intangible impurities; the two bad sources combined made it almost
ham	insupportable. Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft of dirt
ham	and poison, the way lay. Yielding to his own disturbance of mind, and to
ham	his young companion's agitation, which became greater every instant, Mr.
ham	Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest. Each of these stoppages was made
spam	at a doleful grating, by which any languishing good airs that were left
spam	uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and all spoilt and sickly vapours seemed
ham	to crawl in. Through the rusted bars, tastes, rather than glimpses, were
spam	caught of the jumbled neighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer
ham	or lower than the summits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any
ham	promise on it of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.
spam	At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped for the
ham	third time. There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper inclination
ham	and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before the garret story
spam	was reached. The keeper of the wine-shop, always going a little in
spam	advance, and always going on the side which Mr. Lorry took, as though he
spam	dreaded to be asked any question by the young lady, turned himself about
spam	here, and, carefully feeling in the pockets of the coat he carried over
spam	his shoulder, took out a key.
spam	"The door is locked then, my friend?" said Mr. Lorry, surprised.
spam	"Ay. Yes," was the grim reply of Monsieur Defarge.
spam	"You think it necessary to keep the unfortunate gentleman so retired?"
spam	"I think it necessary to turn the key." Monsieur Defarge whispered it
ham	closer in his ear, and frowned heavily.
spam	"Why?"
ham	"Why! Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would be
spam	frightened--rave--tear himself to pieces--die--come to I know not what
ham	harm--if his door was left open."
spam	"Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Lorry.
spam	"Is it possible!" repeated Defarge, bitterly. "Yes. And a beautiful
ham	world we live in, when it _is_ possible, and when many other such things
ham	are possible, and not only possible, but done--done, see you!--under
ham	that sky there, every day. Long live the Devil. Let us go on."
ham	This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a word
spam	of it had reached the young lady's ears. But, by this time she trembled
spam	under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deep anxiety,
ham	and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt it incumbent
spam	on him to speak a word or two of reassurance.
spam	"Courage, dear miss! Courage! Business! The worst will be over in a
spam	moment; it is but passing the room-door, and the worst is over. Then,
ham	all the good you bring to him, all the relief, all the happiness you
spam	bring to him, begin. Let our good friend here, assist you on that side.
spam	That's well, friend Defarge. Come, now. Business, business!"
spam	They went up slowly and softly. The staircase was short, and they were
spam	soon at the top. There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, they came all at
spam	once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent down close together at
spam	the side of a door, and who were intently looking into the room to which
ham	the door belonged, through some chinks or holes in the wall. On hearing
ham	footsteps close at hand, these three turned, and rose, and showed
ham	themselves to be the three of one name who had been drinking in the
ham	wine-shop.
spam	"I forgot them in the surprise of your visit," explained Monsieur
spam	Defarge. "Leave us, good boys; we have business here."
spam	The three glided by, and went silently down.
ham	There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper of
spam	the wine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone, Mr.
spam	Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:
ham	"Do you make a show of Monsieur Manette?"
spam	"I show him, in the way you have seen, to a chosen few."
ham	"Is that well?"
ham	"_I_ think it is well."
spam	"Who are the few? How do you choose them?"
ham	"I choose them as real men, of my name--Jacques is my name--to whom the
ham	sight is likely to do good. Enough; you are English; that is another
ham	thing. Stay there, if you please, a little moment."
spam	With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and looked in
ham	through the crevice in the wall. Soon raising his head again, he struck
spam	twice or thrice upon the door--evidently with no other object than to
ham	make a noise there. With the same intention, he drew the key across it,
ham	three or four times, before he put it clumsily into the lock, and turned
spam	it as heavily as he could.
spam	The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into the
ham	room and said something. A faint voice answered something. Little more
ham	than a single syllable could have been spoken on either side.
ham	He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter. Mr. Lorry
spam	got his arm securely round the daughter's waist, and held her; for he
spam	felt that she was sinking.
ham	"A-a-a-business, business!" he urged, with a moisture that was not of
spam	business shining on his cheek. "Come in, come in!"
spam	"I am afraid of it," she answered, shuddering.
spam	"Of it? What?"
ham	"I mean of him. Of my father."
ham	Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning of
spam	their conductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon his
ham	shoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into the room. He sat her
ham	down just within the door, and held her, clinging to him.
ham	Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the inside,
ham	took out the key again, and held it in his hand. All this he did,
ham	methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise as he
spam	could make. Finally, he walked across the room with a measured tread to
ham	where the window was. He stopped there, and faced round.
spam	The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like, was dim
spam	and dark: for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door in the
ham	roof, with a little crane over it for the hoisting up of stores from
ham	the street: unglazed, and closing up the middle in two pieces, like any
ham	other door of French construction. To exclude the cold, one half of this
spam	door was fast closed, and the other was opened but a very little way.
spam	Such a scanty portion of light was admitted through these means, that it
spam	was difficult, on first coming in, to see anything; and long habit
spam	alone could have slowly formed in any one, the ability to do any work
ham	requiring nicety in such obscurity. Yet, work of that kind was being
spam	done in the garret; for, with his back towards the door, and his face
ham	towards the window where the keeper of the wine-shop stood looking at
spam	him, a white-haired man sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very
ham	busy, making shoes.
spam	VI. The Shoemaker
ham	"Good day!" said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at the white head that
spam	bent low over the shoemaking.
spam	It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to the
spam	salutation, as if it were at a distance:
spam	"Good day!"
spam	"You are still hard at work, I see?"
ham	After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and the
spam	voice replied, "Yes--I am working." This time, a pair of haggard eyes
spam	had looked at the questioner, before the face had dropped again.
spam	The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful. It was not the
spam	faintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no
ham	doubt had their part in it. Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it was
spam	the faintness of solitude and disuse. It was like the last feeble echo
ham	of a sound made long and long ago. So entirely had it lost the life and
spam	resonance of the human voice, that it affected the senses like a once
spam	beautiful colour faded away into a poor weak stain. So sunken and
spam	suppressed it was, that it was like a voice underground. So expressive
spam	it was, of a hopeless and lost creature, that a famished traveller,
ham	wearied out by lonely wandering in a wilderness, would have remembered
spam	home and friends in such a tone before lying down to die.
spam	Some minutes of silent work had passed: and the haggard eyes had looked
ham	up again: not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull mechanical
ham	perception, beforehand, that the spot where the only visitor they were
spam	aware of had stood, was not yet empty.
ham	"I want," said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from the shoemaker,
ham	"to let in a little more light here. You can bear a little more?"
ham	The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening,
spam	at the floor on one side of him; then similarly, at the floor on the
ham	other side of him; then, upward at the speaker.
ham	"What did you say?"
spam	"You can bear a little more light?"
ham	"I must bear it, if you let it in." (Laying the palest shadow of a
ham	stress upon the second word.)
spam	The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at that
ham	angle for the time. A broad ray of light fell into the garret, and
ham	showed the workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing in his
spam	labour. His few common tools and various scraps of leather were at his
spam	feet and on his bench. He had a white beard, raggedly cut, but not very
spam	long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes. The hollowness and
ham	thinness of his face would have caused them to look large, under his yet
ham	dark eyebrows and his confused white hair, though they had been really
spam	otherwise; but, they were naturally large, and looked unnaturally so.
ham	His yellow rags of shirt lay open at the throat, and showed his body
spam	to be withered and worn. He, and his old canvas frock, and his loose
spam	stockings, and all his poor tatters of clothes, had, in a long seclusion
spam	from direct light and air, faded down to such a dull uniformity of
ham	parchment-yellow, that it would have been hard to say which was which.
spam	He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the very bones
spam	of it seemed transparent. So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant gaze,
spam	pausing in his work. He never looked at the figure before him, without
ham	first looking down on this side of himself, then on that, as if he had
ham	lost the habit of associating place with sound; he never spoke, without
spam	first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to speak.
spam	"Are you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?" asked Defarge,
ham	motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward.
ham	"What did you say?"
ham	"Do you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?"
spam	"I can't say that I mean to. I suppose so. I don't know."
spam	But, the question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it again.
ham	Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door. When
spam	he had stood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, the shoemaker
ham	looked up. He showed no surprise at seeing another figure, but the
spam	unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips as he looked at
ham	it (his lips and his nails were of the same pale lead-colour), and then
spam	the hand dropped to his work, and he once more bent over the shoe. The
spam	look and the action had occupied but an instant.
ham	"You have a visitor, you see," said Monsieur Defarge.
spam	"What did you say?"
spam	"Here is a visitor."
spam	The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand from his
spam	work.
ham	"Come!" said Defarge. "Here is monsieur, who knows a well-made shoe when
ham	he sees one. Show him that shoe you are working at. Take it, monsieur."
spam	Mr. Lorry took it in his hand.
ham	"Tell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and the maker's name."
spam	There was a longer pause than usual, before the shoemaker replied:
spam	"I forget what it was you asked me. What did you say?"
spam	"I said, couldn't you describe the kind of shoe, for monsieur's
spam	information?"
spam	"It is a lady's shoe. It is a young lady's walking-shoe. It is in the
spam	present mode. I never saw the mode. I have had a pattern in my hand." He
ham	glanced at the shoe with some little passing touch of pride.
ham	"And the maker's name?" said Defarge.
ham	Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right hand
spam	in the hollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand in the
spam	hollow of the right, and then passed a hand across his bearded chin, and
spam	so on in regular changes, without a moment's intermission. The task of
spam	recalling him from the vagrancy into which he always sank when he
spam	had spoken, was like recalling some very weak person from a swoon, or
spam	endeavouring, in the hope of some disclosure, to stay the spirit of a
spam	fast-dying man.
ham	"Did you ask me for my name?"
spam	"Assuredly I did."
ham	"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."
ham	"Is that all?"
ham	"One Hundred and Five, North Tower."
ham	With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to work
ham	again, until the silence was again broken.
spam	"You are not a shoemaker by trade?" said Mr. Lorry, looking steadfastly
spam	at him.
ham	His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred the
ham	question to him: but as no help came from that quarter, they turned back
ham	on the questioner when they had sought the ground.
ham	"I am not a shoemaker by trade? No, I was not a shoemaker by trade. I-I
spam	learnt it here. I taught myself. I asked leave to--"
ham	He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes on his
spam	hands the whole time. His eyes came slowly back, at last, to the face
spam	from which they had wandered; when they rested on it, he started, and
spam	resumed, in the manner of a sleeper that moment awake, reverting to a
spam	subject of last night.
ham	"I asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficulty after
ham	a long while, and I have made shoes ever since."
ham	As he held out his hand for the shoe that had been taken from him, Mr.
ham	Lorry said, still looking steadfastly in his face:
ham	"Monsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?"
ham	The shoe dropped to the ground, and he sat looking fixedly at the
ham	questioner.
spam	"Monsieur Manette"; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge's arm; "do you
spam	remember nothing of this man? Look at him. Look at me. Is there no old
spam	banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time, rising in your
spam	mind, Monsieur Manette?"
ham	As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at Mr.
spam	Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively intent
spam	intelligence in the middle of the forehead, gradually forced themselves
ham	through the black mist that had fallen on him. They were overclouded
spam	again, they were fainter, they were gone; but they had been there. And
ham	so exactly was the expression repeated on the fair young face of her who
ham	had crept along the wall to a point where she could see him, and where
ham	she now stood looking at him, with hands which at first had been only
ham	raised in frightened compassion, if not even to keep him off and
ham	shut out the sight of him, but which were now extending towards him,
spam	trembling with eagerness to lay the spectral face upon her warm young
spam	breast, and love it back to life and hope--so exactly was the expression
ham	repeated (though in stronger characters) on her fair young face, that it
spam	looked as though it had passed like a moving light, from him to her.
spam	Darkness had fallen on him in its place. He looked at the two, less and
spam	less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought the ground
spam	and looked about him in the old way. Finally, with a deep long sigh, he
spam	took the shoe up, and resumed his work.
ham	"Have you recognised him, monsieur?" asked Defarge in a whisper.
ham	"Yes; for a moment. At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I have
spam	unquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knew so
ham	well. Hush! Let us draw further back. Hush!"
spam	She had moved from the wall of the garret, very near to the bench on
ham	which he sat. There was something awful in his unconsciousness of the
spam	figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as he stooped
spam	over his labour.
spam	Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made. She stood, like a spirit,
ham	beside him, and he bent over his work.
spam	It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the instrument
ham	in his hand, for his shoemaker's knife. It lay on that side of him
spam	which was not the side on which she stood. He had taken it up, and was
spam	stooping to work again, when his eyes caught the skirt of her dress. He
ham	raised them, and saw her face. The two spectators started forward,
spam	but she stayed them with a motion of her hand. She had no fear of his
spam	striking at her with the knife, though they had.
spam	He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips began
ham	to form some words, though no sound proceeded from them. By degrees, in
ham	the pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he was heard to say:
ham	"What is this?"
spam	With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her
ham	lips, and kissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as if she
spam	laid his ruined head there.
spam	"You are not the gaoler's daughter?"
ham	She sighed "No."
ham	"Who are you?"
ham	Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the bench
spam	beside him. He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm. A strange
spam	thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed over his frame; he
ham	laid the knife down softly, as he sat staring at her.
ham	Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly pushed
spam	aside, and fell down over her neck. Advancing his hand by little and
spam	little, he took it up and looked at it. In the midst of the action
spam	he went astray, and, with another deep sigh, fell to work at his
ham	shoemaking.
ham	But not for long. Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon his
ham	shoulder. After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if to
ham	be sure that it was really there, he laid down his work, put his hand
ham	to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap of folded rag
ham	attached to it. He opened this, carefully, on his knee, and it contained
ham	a very little quantity of hair: not more than one or two long golden
ham	hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off upon his finger.
spam	He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it. "It is
ham	the same. How can it be! When was it! How was it!"
ham	As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed to
spam	become conscious that it was in hers too. He turned her full to the
spam	light, and looked at her.
ham	"She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was summoned
spam	out--she had a fear of my going, though I had none--and when I was
spam	brought to the North Tower they found these upon my sleeve. 'You will
ham	leave me them? They can never help me to escape in the body, though they
ham	may in the spirit.' Those were the words I said. I remember them very
spam	well."
spam	He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter it.
ham	But when he did find spoken words for it, they came to him coherently,
ham	though slowly.
ham	"How was this?--_Was it you_?"
ham	Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with a
ham	frightful suddenness. But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, and only
ham	said, in a low voice, "I entreat you, good gentlemen, do not come near
spam	us, do not speak, do not move!"
spam	"Hark!" he exclaimed. "Whose voice was that?"
spam	His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his white
spam	hair, which they tore in a frenzy. It died out, as everything but his
ham	shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his little packet and
spam	tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked at her, and
ham	gloomily shook his head.
spam	"No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming. It can't be. See what the
spam	prisoner is. These are not the hands she knew, this is not the face
ham	she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard. No, no. She was--and He
ham	was--before the slow years of the North Tower--ages ago. What is your
spam	name, my gentle angel?"
spam	Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon her knees
ham	before him, with her appealing hands upon his breast.
ham	"O, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my mother was,
ham	and who my father, and how I never knew their hard, hard history. But I
spam	cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell you here. All that I may
ham	tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to you to touch me and to bless
spam	me. Kiss me, kiss me! O my dear, my dear!"
ham	His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed and
ham	lighted it as though it were the light of Freedom shining on him.
ham	"If you hear in my voice--I don't know that it is so, but I hope it
spam	is--if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once was
spam	sweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it! If you touch, in
spam	touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head that lay on your
spam	breast when you were young and free, weep for it, weep for it! If, when
ham	I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where I will be true to you
spam	with all my duty and with all my faithful service, I bring back the
ham	remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poor heart pined away,
ham	weep for it, weep for it!"
ham	She held him closer round the neck, and rocked him on her breast like a
ham	child.
ham	"If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and that I
ham	have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England to be at
ham	peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life laid waste,
ham	and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it, weep for it! And
spam	if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my father who is living,
spam	and of my mother who is dead, you learn that I have to kneel to my
ham	honoured father, and implore his pardon for having never for his sake
spam	striven all day and lain awake and wept all night, because the love of
spam	my poor mother hid his torture from me, weep for it, weep for it! Weep
ham	for her, then, and for me! Good gentlemen, thank God! I feel his sacred
ham	tears upon my face, and his sobs strike against my heart. O, see! Thank
spam	God for us, thank God!"
spam	He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast: a sight so
ham	touching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and suffering which
ham	had gone before it, that the two beholders covered their faces.
spam	When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and his heaving
spam	breast and shaken form had long yielded to the calm that must follow all
spam	storms--emblem to humanity, of the rest and silence into which the storm
spam	called Life must hush at last--they came forward to raise the father and
spam	daughter from the ground. He had gradually dropped to the floor, and lay
spam	there in a lethargy, worn out. She had nestled down with him, that his
ham	head might lie upon her arm; and her hair drooping over him curtained
spam	him from the light.
ham	"If, without disturbing him," she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorry as
spam	he stooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose, "all could be
ham	arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from the very door, he
spam	could be taken away--"
ham	"But, consider. Is he fit for the journey?" asked Mr. Lorry.
ham	"More fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so dreadful to
ham	him."
spam	"It is true," said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear. "More
ham	than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of France.
spam	Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?"
ham	"That's business," said Mr. Lorry, resuming on the shortest notice his
ham	methodical manners; "and if business is to be done, I had better do it."
spam	"Then be so kind," urged Miss Manette, "as to leave us here. You see how
ham	composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him with me
ham	now. Why should you be? If you will lock the door to secure us from
spam	interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when you come back,
spam	as quiet as you leave him. In any case, I will take care of him until
spam	you return, and then we will remove him straight."
ham	Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course, and
spam	in favour of one of them remaining. But, as there were not only carriage
spam	and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as time pressed,
spam	for the day was drawing to an end, it came at last to their hastily
ham	dividing the business that was necessary to be done, and hurrying away
spam	to do it.
spam	Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down on the
ham	hard ground close at the father's side, and watched him. The darkness
spam	deepened and deepened, and they both lay quiet, until a light gleamed
spam	through the chinks in the wall.
ham	Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey, and
spam	had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers, bread and
spam	meat, wine, and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put this provender, and the
spam	lamp he carried, on the shoemaker's bench (there was nothing else in the
spam	garret but a pallet bed), and he and Mr. Lorry roused the captive, and
ham	assisted him to his feet.
ham	No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, in
spam	the scared blank wonder of his face. Whether he knew what had happened,
ham	whether he recollected what they had said to him, whether he knew that
spam	he was free, were questions which no sagacity could have solved. They
spam	tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and so very slow to
ham	answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, and agreed for
ham	the time to tamper with him no more. He had a wild, lost manner of
ham	occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not been seen
spam	in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound of his
spam	daughter's voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.
spam	In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion, he
spam	ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the cloak
ham	and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear. He readily responded to
ham	his daughter's drawing her arm through his, and took--and kept--her hand
spam	in both his own.
spam	They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp, Mr.
ham	Lorry closing the little procession. They had not traversed many steps
ham	of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at the roof and
ham	round at the walls.
ham	"You remember the place, my father? You remember coming up here?"
ham	"What did you say?"
spam	But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer as if
spam	she had repeated it.
ham	"Remember? No, I don't remember. It was so very long ago."
ham	That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from his
ham	prison to that house, was apparent to them. They heard him mutter,
ham	"One Hundred and Five, North Tower;" and when he looked about him, it
spam	evidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed
spam	him. On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively altered his
ham	tread, as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when there was
spam	no drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open street, he
ham	dropped his daughter's hand and clasped his head again.
ham	No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of the
ham	many windows; not even a chance passerby was in the street. An unnatural
spam	silence and desertion reigned there. Only one soul was to be seen, and
spam	that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against the door-post, knitting, and
spam	saw nothing.
spam	The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed
spam	him, when Mr. Lorry's feet were arrested on the step by his asking,
ham	miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes. Madame
ham	Defarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them, and
ham	went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard. She quickly
spam	brought them down and handed them in;--and immediately afterwards leaned
spam	against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.
ham	Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word "To the Barrier!" The
ham	postilion cracked his whip, and they clattered away under the feeble
spam	over-swinging lamps.
ham	Under the over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in the better
ham	streets, and ever dimmer in the worse--and by lighted shops, gay crowds,
ham	illuminated coffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of the city
ham	gates. Soldiers with lanterns, at the guard-house there. "Your papers,
spam	travellers!" "See here then, Monsieur the Officer," said Defarge,
ham	getting down, and taking him gravely apart, "these are the papers of
ham	monsieur inside, with the white head. They were consigned to me, with
spam	him, at the--" He dropped his voice, there was a flutter among the
ham	military lanterns, and one of them being handed into the coach by an arm
ham	in uniform, the eyes connected with the arm looked, not an every day
spam	or an every night look, at monsieur with the white head. "It is well.
ham	Forward!" from the uniform. "Adieu!" from Defarge. And so, under a short
ham	grove of feebler and feebler over-swinging lamps, out under the great
spam	grove of stars.
spam	Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote from
spam	this little earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whether their
spam	rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space where anything
ham	is suffered or done: the shadows of the night were broad and black.
spam	All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn, they once more
spam	whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting opposite the buried
spam	man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powers were for ever
ham	lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--the old inquiry:
ham	"I hope you care to be recalled to life?"
ham	And the old answer:
ham	"I can't say."
spam	The end of the first book.
spam	Book the Second--the Golden Thread
spam	I. Five Years Later
spam	Tellson's Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in the
spam	year one thousand seven hundred and eighty. It was very small, very
spam	dark, very ugly, very incommodious. It was an old-fashioned place,
spam	moreover, in the moral attribute that the partners in the House were
ham	proud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its ugliness,
ham	proud of its incommodiousness. They were even boastful of its eminence
spam	in those particulars, and were fired by an express conviction that, if
spam	it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable. This was
spam	no passive belief, but an active weapon which they flashed at more
spam	convenient places of business. Tellson's (they said) wanted
ham	no elbow-room, Tellson's wanted no light, Tellson's wanted no
ham	embellishment. Noakes and Co.'s might, or Snooks Brothers' might; but
ham	Tellson's, thank Heaven--!
spam	Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on the
spam	question of rebuilding Tellson's. In this respect the House was much
spam	on a par with the Country; which did very often disinherit its sons for
ham	suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long been highly
spam	objectionable, but were only the more respectable.
ham	Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson's was the triumphant perfection
ham	of inconvenience. After bursting open a door of idiotic obstinacy with
spam	a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson's down two steps,
ham	and came to your senses in a miserable little shop, with two little
ham	counters, where the oldest of men made your cheque shake as if the
ham	wind rustled it, while they examined the signature by the dingiest of
ham	windows, which were always under a shower-bath of mud from Fleet-street,
ham	and which were made the dingier by their own iron bars proper, and the
ham	heavy shadow of Temple Bar. If your business necessitated your seeing
spam	"the House," you were put into a species of Condemned Hold at the back,
spam	where you meditated on a misspent life, until the House came with its
spam	hands in its pockets, and you could hardly blink at it in the dismal
ham	twilight. Your money came out of, or went into, wormy old wooden
ham	drawers, particles of which flew up your nose and down your throat when
spam	they were opened and shut. Your bank-notes had a musty odour, as if they
ham	were fast decomposing into rags again. Your plate was stowed away among
spam	the neighbouring cesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good
spam	polish in a day or two. Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms
ham	made of kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out of their
ham	parchments into the banking-house air. Your lighter boxes of family
ham	papers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great
spam	dining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in the year
ham	one thousand seven hundred and eighty, the first letters written to you
ham	by your old love, or by your little children, were but newly released
ham	from the horror of being ogled through the windows, by the heads
spam	exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocity worthy of
spam	Abyssinia or Ashantee.
spam	But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in vogue
spam	with all trades and professions, and not least of all with Tellson's.
ham	Death is Nature's remedy for all things, and why not Legislation's?
ham	Accordingly, the forger was put to Death; the utterer of a bad note
spam	was put to Death; the unlawful opener of a letter was put to Death; the
spam	purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to Death; the holder
ham	of a horse at Tellson's door, who made off with it, was put to
spam	Death; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; the sounders of
ham	three-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of Crime, were put to
ham	Death. Not that it did the least good in the way of prevention--it
spam	might almost have been worth remarking that the fact was exactly the
spam	reverse--but, it cleared off (as to this world) the trouble of each
ham	particular case, and left nothing else connected with it to be looked
spam	after. Thus, Tellson's, in its day, like greater places of business,
ham	its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if the heads laid
ham	low before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of being privately
spam	disposed of, they would probably have excluded what little light the
ham	ground floor had, in a rather significant manner.
ham	Cramped in all kinds of dim cupboards and hutches at Tellson's, the
spam	oldest of men carried on the business gravely. When they took a young
spam	man into Tellson's London house, they hid him somewhere till he was
spam	old. They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he had the full
ham	Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him. Then only was he permitted to
ham	be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, and casting his breeches
spam	and gaiters into the general weight of the establishment.
ham	Outside Tellson's--never by any means in it, unless called in--was an
ham	odd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as the live
spam	sign of the house. He was never absent during business hours, unless
ham	upon an errand, and then he was represented by his son: a grisly urchin
spam	of twelve, who was his express image. People understood that Tellson's,
spam	in a stately way, tolerated the odd-job-man. The house had always
spam	tolerated some person in that capacity, and time and tide had drifted
spam	this person to the post. His surname was Cruncher, and on the youthful
spam	occasion of his renouncing by proxy the works of darkness, in the
ham	easterly parish church of Hounsditch, he had received the added
spam	appellation of Jerry.
ham	The scene was Mr. Cruncher's private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,
ham	Whitefriars: the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy March
ham	morning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty. (Mr. Cruncher himself
spam	always spoke of the year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes: apparently under
spam	the impression that the Christian era dated from the invention of a
ham	popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name upon it.)
spam	Mr. Cruncher's apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and were
ham	but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass in it
ham	might be counted as one. But they were very decently kept. Early as
spam	it was, on the windy March morning, the room in which he lay abed was
ham	already scrubbed throughout; and between the cups and saucers arranged
spam	for breakfast, and the lumbering deal table, a very clean white cloth
spam	was spread.
ham	Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin
spam	at home. At first, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll
ham	and surge in bed, until he rose above the surface, with his spiky hair
spam	looking as if it must tear the sheets to ribbons. At which juncture, he
spam	exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:
ham	"Bust me, if she ain't at it agin!"
spam	A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in a
ham	corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was the
ham	person referred to.
ham	"What!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot. "You're at it
spam	agin, are you?"
ham	After hailing the morn with this second salutation, he threw a boot at
ham	the woman as a third. It was a very muddy boot, and may introduce the
spam	odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher's domestic economy, that,
ham	whereas he often came home after banking hours with clean boots, he
ham	often got up next morning to find the same boots covered with clay.
ham	"What," said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missing his
spam	mark--"what are you up to, Aggerawayter?"
spam	"I was only saying my prayers."
ham	"Saying your prayers! You're a nice woman! What do you mean by flopping
spam	yourself down and praying agin me?"
ham	"I was not praying against you; I was praying for you."
ham	"You weren't. And if you were, I won't be took the liberty with. Here!
spam	your mother's a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin your
ham	father's prosperity. You've got a dutiful mother, you have, my son.
ham	You've got a religious mother, you have, my boy: going and flopping
spam	herself down, and praying that the bread-and-butter may be snatched out
ham	of the mouth of her only child."
ham	Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and, turning
ham	to his mother, strongly deprecated any praying away of his personal
ham	board.
ham	"And what do you suppose, you conceited female," said Mr. Cruncher, with
ham	unconscious inconsistency, "that the worth of _your_ prayers may be?
spam	Name the price that you put _your_ prayers at!"
spam	"They only come from the heart, Jerry. They are worth no more than
spam	that."
ham	"Worth no more than that," repeated Mr. Cruncher. "They ain't worth
spam	much, then. Whether or no, I won't be prayed agin, I tell you. I can't
ham	afford it. I'm not a going to be made unlucky by _your_ sneaking. If
spam	you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favour of your husband and
ham	child, and not in opposition to 'em. If I had had any but a unnat'ral
spam	wife, and this poor boy had had any but a unnat'ral mother, I might
spam	have made some money last week instead of being counter-prayed and
spam	countermined and religiously circumwented into the worst of luck.
ham	B-u-u-ust me!" said Mr. Cruncher, who all this time had been putting
spam	on his clothes, "if I ain't, what with piety and one blowed thing and
ham	another, been choused this last week into as bad luck as ever a poor
spam	devil of a honest tradesman met with! Young Jerry, dress yourself, my
ham	boy, and while I clean my boots keep a eye upon your mother now and
spam	then, and if you see any signs of more flopping, give me a call. For, I
spam	tell you," here he addressed his wife once more, "I won't be gone agin,
ham	in this manner. I am as rickety as a hackney-coach, I'm as sleepy as
spam	laudanum, my lines is strained to that degree that I shouldn't know, if
spam	it wasn't for the pain in 'em, which was me and which somebody else, yet
ham	I'm none the better for it in pocket; and it's my suspicion that you've
spam	been at it from morning to night to prevent me from being the better for
spam	it in pocket, and I won't put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you
spam	say now!"
ham	Growling, in addition, such phrases as "Ah! yes! You're religious, too.
ham	You wouldn't put yourself in opposition to the interests of your husband
ham	and child, would you? Not you!" and throwing off other sarcastic sparks
spam	from the whirling grindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betook
spam	himself to his boot-cleaning and his general preparation for business.
ham	In the meantime, his son, whose head was garnished with tenderer spikes,
spam	and whose young eyes stood close by one another, as his father's did,
ham	kept the required watch upon his mother. He greatly disturbed that poor
ham	woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleeping closet, where he made
spam	his toilet, with a suppressed cry of "You are going to flop, mother.
spam	--Halloa, father!" and, after raising this fictitious alarm, darting in
ham	again with an undutiful grin.
ham	Mr. Cruncher's temper was not at all improved when he came to his
spam	breakfast. He resented Mrs. Cruncher's saying grace with particular
ham	animosity.
ham	"Now, Aggerawayter! What are you up to? At it again?"
ham	His wife explained that she had merely "asked a blessing."
ham	"Don't do it!" said Mr. Crunches looking about, as if he rather expected
spam	to see the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wife's petitions. "I
ham	ain't a going to be blest out of house and home. I won't have my wittles
ham	blest off my table. Keep still!"
spam	Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a party
spam	which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher worried
ham	his breakfast rather than ate it, growling over it like any four-footed
ham	inmate of a menagerie. Towards nine o'clock he smoothed his ruffled
ham	aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-like an exterior as
ham	he could overlay his natural self with, issued forth to the occupation
spam	of the day.
ham	It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite
spam	description of himself as "a honest tradesman." His stock consisted of
spam	a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, which stool,
spam	young Jerry, walking at his father's side, carried every morning to
ham	beneath the banking-house window that was nearest Temple Bar: where,
ham	with the addition of the first handful of straw that could be gleaned
ham	from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wet from the odd-job-man's
ham	feet, it formed the encampment for the day. On this post of his, Mr.
spam	Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street and the Temple, as the Bar
ham	itself,--and was almost as in-looking.
spam	Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his
ham	three-cornered hat to the oldest of men as they passed in to Tellson's,
spam	Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with young Jerry
spam	standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through the Bar, to
ham	inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description on passing
ham	boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose. Father and son,
ham	extremely like each other, looking silently on at the morning traffic
ham	in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to one another as the two
ham	eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblance to a pair of monkeys.
ham	The resemblance was not lessened by the accidental circumstance, that
spam	the mature Jerry bit and spat out straw, while the twinkling eyes of the
ham	youthful Jerry were as restlessly watchful of him as of everything else
ham	in Fleet-street.
ham	The head of one of the regular indoor messengers attached to Tellson's
ham	establishment was put through the door, and the word was given:
spam	"Porter wanted!"
spam	"Hooray, father! Here's an early job to begin with!"
ham	Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself on
ham	the stool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw his father
ham	had been chewing, and cogitated.
ham	"Al-ways rusty! His fingers is al-ways rusty!" muttered young Jerry.
spam	"Where does my father get all that iron rust from? He don't get no iron
spam	rust here!"
spam	II. A Sight
ham	"You know the Old Bailey well, no doubt?" said one of the oldest of
spam	clerks to Jerry the messenger.
spam	"Ye-es, sir," returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner. "I _do_
ham	know the Bailey."
spam	"Just so. And you know Mr. Lorry."
ham	"I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey. Much
ham	better," said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at the establishment
spam	in question, "than I, as a honest tradesman, wish to know the Bailey."
ham	"Very well. Find the door where the witnesses go in, and show the
ham	door-keeper this note for Mr. Lorry. He will then let you in."
spam	"Into the court, sir?"
spam	"Into the court."
ham	Mr. Cruncher's eyes seemed to get a little closer to one another, and to
spam	interchange the inquiry, "What do you think of this?"
ham	"Am I to wait in the court, sir?" he asked, as the result of that
spam	conference.
spam	"I am going to tell you. The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr.
ham	Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry's
spam	attention, and show him where you stand. Then what you have to do, is,
ham	to remain there until he wants you."
ham	"Is that all, sir?"
spam	"That's all. He wishes to have a messenger at hand. This is to tell him
spam	you are there."
spam	As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the note,
ham	Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to the
ham	blotting-paper stage, remarked:
spam	"I suppose they'll be trying Forgeries this morning?"
ham	"Treason!"
ham	"That's quartering," said Jerry. "Barbarous!"
spam	"It is the law," remarked the ancient clerk, turning his surprised
ham	spectacles upon him. "It is the law."
spam	"It's hard in the law to spile a man, I think. It's hard enough to kill
spam	him, but it's wery hard to spile him, sir."
ham	"Not at all," retained the ancient clerk. "Speak well of the law. Take
ham	care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the law to take
spam	care of itself. I give you that advice."
ham	"It's the damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice," said Jerry. "I
ham	leave you to judge what a damp way of earning a living mine is."
ham	"Well, well," said the old clerk; "we all have our various ways of
ham	gaining a livelihood. Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have dry
ham	ways. Here is the letter. Go along."
spam	Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less internal
spam	deference than he made an outward show of, "You are a lean old one,
spam	too," made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his destination,
ham	and went his way.
spam	They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside Newgate had
ham	not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached to it.
spam	But, the gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds of debauchery and
ham	villainy were practised, and where dire diseases were bred, that came
spam	into court with the prisoners, and sometimes rushed straight from the
ham	dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulled him off the bench. It
ham	had more than once happened, that the Judge in the black cap pronounced
spam	his own doom as certainly as the prisoner's, and even died before him.
ham	For the rest, the Old Bailey was famous as a kind of deadly inn-yard,
spam	from which pale travellers set out continually, in carts and coaches, on
ham	a violent passage into the other world: traversing some two miles and a
spam	half of public street and road, and shaming few good citizens, if any.
spam	So powerful is use, and so desirable to be good use in the beginning. It
ham	was famous, too, for the pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted
spam	a punishment of which no one could foresee the extent; also, for
ham	the whipping-post, another dear old institution, very humanising and
spam	softening to behold in action; also, for extensive transactions in
spam	blood-money, another fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematically
ham	leading to the most frightful mercenary crimes that could be committed
ham	under Heaven. Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date, was a choice
spam	illustration of the precept, that "Whatever is is right;" an aphorism
ham	that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not include the troublesome
spam	consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.
spam	Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this
ham	hideous scene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to make his
spam	way quietly, the messenger found out the door he sought, and handed in
spam	his letter through a trap in it. For, people then paid to see the play
ham	at the Old Bailey, just as they paid to see the play in Bedlam--only the
spam	former entertainment was much the dearer. Therefore, all the Old Bailey
ham	doors were well guarded--except, indeed, the social doors by which the
spam	criminals got there, and those were always left wide open.
spam	After some delay and demur, the door grudgingly turned on its hinges a
spam	very little way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himself into
ham	court.
ham	"What's on?" he asked, in a whisper, of the man he found himself next
ham	to.
spam	"Nothing yet."
ham	"What's coming on?"
ham	"The Treason case."
ham	"The quartering one, eh?"
spam	"Ah!" returned the man, with a relish; "he'll be drawn on a hurdle to
ham	be half hanged, and then he'll be taken down and sliced before his own
spam	face, and then his inside will be taken out and burnt while he looks on,
spam	and then his head will be chopped off, and he'll be cut into quarters.
ham	That's the sentence."
ham	"If he's found Guilty, you mean to say?" Jerry added, by way of proviso.
spam	"Oh! they'll find him guilty," said the other. "Don't you be afraid of
ham	that."
spam	Mr. Cruncher's attention was here diverted to the door-keeper, whom he
spam	saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand. Mr. Lorry
ham	sat at a table, among the gentlemen in wigs: not far from a wigged
spam	gentleman, the prisoner's counsel, who had a great bundle of papers
spam	before him: and nearly opposite another wigged gentleman with his hands
ham	in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr. Cruncher looked at him
spam	then or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated on the ceiling of the
spam	court. After some gruff coughing and rubbing of his chin and signing
ham	with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice of Mr. Lorry, who had stood up
ham	to look for him, and who quietly nodded and sat down again.
spam	"What's _he_ got to do with the case?" asked the man he had spoken with.
ham	"Blest if I know," said Jerry.
ham	"What have _you_ got to do with it, then, if a person may inquire?"
spam	"Blest if I know that either," said Jerry.
spam	The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and settling
ham	down in the court, stopped the dialogue. Presently, the dock became the
ham	central point of interest. Two gaolers, who had been standing there,
spam	went out, and the prisoner was brought in, and put to the bar.
spam	Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at the
ham	ceiling, stared at him. All the human breath in the place, rolled
spam	at him, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire. Eager faces strained round
spam	pillars and corners, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rows
spam	stood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on the floor of the court,
spam	laid their hands on the shoulders of the people before them, to help
ham	themselves, at anybody's cost, to a view of him--stood a-tiptoe, got
ham	upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see every inch of him.
spam	Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit of the spiked wall
spam	of Newgate, Jerry stood: aiming at the prisoner the beery breath of a
ham	whet he had taken as he came along, and discharging it to mingle with
ham	the waves of other beer, and gin, and tea, and coffee, and what not,
spam	that flowed at him, and already broke upon the great windows behind him
spam	in an impure mist and rain.
spam	The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of about
spam	five-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek and
ham	a dark eye. His condition was that of a young gentleman. He was plainly
ham	dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was long and
spam	dark, was gathered in a ribbon at the back of his neck; more to be out
spam	of his way than for ornament. As an emotion of the mind will express
spam	itself through any covering of the body, so the paleness which his
ham	situation engendered came through the brown upon his cheek, showing the
ham	soul to be stronger than the sun. He was otherwise quite self-possessed,
spam	bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet.
spam	The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at,
ham	was not a sort that elevated humanity. Had he stood in peril of a less
spam	horrible sentence--had there been a chance of any one of its savage
spam	details being spared--by just so much would he have lost in his
ham	fascination. The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefully mangled,
ham	was the sight; the immortal creature that was to be so butchered
ham	and torn asunder, yielded the sensation. Whatever gloss the various
spam	spectators put upon the interest, according to their several arts and
spam	powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at the root of it, Ogreish.
ham	Silence in the court! Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty to
ham	an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for that
spam	he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent, and so
spam	forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his having, on divers
spam	occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, the French
spam	King, in his wars against our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and
spam	so forth; that was to say, by coming and going, between the dominions of
ham	our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, and those of the
ham	said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely, traitorously, and otherwise
spam	evil-adverbiously, revealing to the said French Lewis what forces our
ham	said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, had in preparation
spam	to send to Canada and North America. This much, Jerry, with his head
spam	becoming more and more spiky as the law terms bristled it, made out with
spam	huge satisfaction, and so arrived circuitously at the understanding that
spam	the aforesaid, and over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood
spam	there before him upon his trial; that the jury were swearing in; and
spam	that Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.
spam	The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged,
spam	beheaded, and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched from
spam	the situation, nor assumed any theatrical air in it. He was quiet and
spam	attentive; watched the opening proceedings with a grave interest;
spam	and stood with his hands resting on the slab of wood before him, so
spam	composedly, that they had not displaced a leaf of the herbs with which
ham	it was strewn. The court was all bestrewn with herbs and sprinkled with
spam	vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol fever.
ham	Over the prisoner's head there was a mirror, to throw the light down
ham	upon him. Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflected in
spam	it, and had passed from its surface and this earth's together. Haunted
spam	in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would have been, if the
spam	glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, as the ocean is one
spam	day to give up its dead. Some passing thought of the infamy and disgrace
ham	for which it had been reserved, may have struck the prisoner's mind. Be
ham	that as it may, a change in his position making him conscious of a bar
ham	of light across his face, he looked up; and when he saw the glass his
spam	face flushed, and his right hand pushed the herbs away.
spam	It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the court
spam	which was on his left. About on a level with his eyes, there sat,
spam	in that corner of the Judge's bench, two persons upon whom his look
ham	immediately rested; so immediately, and so much to the changing of his
spam	aspect, that all the eyes that were turned upon him, turned to them.
spam	The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little more than
spam	twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man of a very
spam	remarkable appearance in respect of the absolute whiteness of his hair,
ham	and a certain indescribable intensity of face: not of an active kind,
ham	but pondering and self-communing. When this expression was upon him, he
ham	looked as if he were old; but when it was stirred and broken up--as
ham	it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to his daughter--he became a
spam	handsome man, not past the prime of life.
spam	His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she sat by
spam	him, and the other pressed upon it. She had drawn close to him, in her
ham	dread of the scene, and in her pity for the prisoner. Her forehead had
spam	been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror and compassion
spam	that saw nothing but the peril of the accused. This had been so very
spam	noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown, that starers who
ham	had had no pity for him were touched by her; and the whisper went about,
spam	"Who are they?"
spam	Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his own
ham	manner, and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in his
spam	absorption, stretched his neck to hear who they were. The crowd about
spam	him had pressed and passed the inquiry on to the nearest attendant, and
spam	from him it had been more slowly pressed and passed back; at last it got
spam	to Jerry:
spam	"Witnesses."
ham	"For which side?"
ham	"Against."
ham	"Against what side?"
ham	"The prisoner's."
spam	The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalled them,
spam	leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whose life was
spam	in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope, grind the
spam	axe, and hammer the nails into the scaffold.
ham	III. A Disappointment
spam	Mr. Attorney-General had to inform the jury, that the prisoner before
ham	them, though young in years, was old in the treasonable practices which
spam	claimed the forfeit of his life. That this correspondence with the
spam	public enemy was not a correspondence of to-day, or of yesterday, or
ham	even of last year, or of the year before. That, it was certain the
spam	prisoner had, for longer than that, been in the habit of passing and
ham	repassing between France and England, on secret business of which
spam	he could give no honest account. That, if it were in the nature of
ham	traitorous ways to thrive (which happily it never was), the real
spam	wickedness and guilt of his business might have remained undiscovered.
spam	That Providence, however, had put it into the heart of a person who
spam	was beyond fear and beyond reproach, to ferret out the nature of the
ham	prisoner's schemes, and, struck with horror, to disclose them to his
spam	Majesty's Chief Secretary of State and most honourable Privy Council.
spam	That, this patriot would be produced before them. That, his position and
spam	attitude were, on the whole, sublime. That, he had been the prisoner's
ham	friend, but, at once in an auspicious and an evil hour detecting his
ham	infamy, had resolved to immolate the traitor he could no longer cherish
ham	in his bosom, on the sacred altar of his country. That, if statues
spam	were decreed in Britain, as in ancient Greece and Rome, to public
spam	benefactors, this shining citizen would assuredly have had one. That, as
spam	they were not so decreed, he probably would not have one. That, Virtue,
spam	as had been observed by the poets (in many passages which he well
ham	knew the jury would have, word for word, at the tips of their tongues;
ham	whereat the jury's countenances displayed a guilty consciousness that
ham	they knew nothing about the passages), was in a manner contagious; more
spam	especially the bright virtue known as patriotism, or love of country.
ham	That, the lofty example of this immaculate and unimpeachable witness
ham	for the Crown, to refer to whom however unworthily was an honour, had
ham	communicated itself to the prisoner's servant, and had engendered in him
spam	a holy determination to examine his master's table-drawers and pockets,
spam	and secrete his papers. That, he (Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared to
spam	hear some disparagement attempted of this admirable servant; but that,
spam	in a general way, he preferred him to his (Mr. Attorney-General's)
ham	brothers and sisters, and honoured him more than his (Mr.
spam	Attorney-General's) father and mother. That, he called with confidence
ham	on the jury to come and do likewise. That, the evidence of these two
spam	witnesses, coupled with the documents of their discovering that would be
ham	produced, would show the prisoner to have been furnished with lists of
spam	his Majesty's forces, and of their disposition and preparation, both by
spam	sea and land, and would leave no doubt that he had habitually conveyed
ham	such information to a hostile power. That, these lists could not be
spam	proved to be in the prisoner's handwriting; but that it was all the
ham	same; that, indeed, it was rather the better for the prosecution, as
spam	showing the prisoner to be artful in his precautions. That, the proof
spam	would go back five years, and would show the prisoner already engaged
ham	in these pernicious missions, within a few weeks before the date of the
ham	very first action fought between the British troops and the Americans.
ham	That, for these reasons, the jury, being a loyal jury (as he knew they
ham	were), and being a responsible jury (as _they_ knew they were), must
ham	positively find the prisoner Guilty, and make an end of him, whether
spam	they liked it or not. That, they never could lay their heads upon their
spam	pillows; that, they never could tolerate the idea of their wives laying
ham	their heads upon their pillows; that, they never could endure the notion
spam	of their children laying their heads upon their pillows; in short, that
spam	there never more could be, for them or theirs, any laying of heads upon
ham	pillows at all, unless the prisoner's head was taken off. That head
spam	Mr. Attorney-General concluded by demanding of them, in the name of
spam	everything he could think of with a round turn in it, and on the faith
spam	of his solemn asseveration that he already considered the prisoner as
spam	good as dead and gone.
ham	When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as if
ham	a cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, in
spam	anticipation of what he was soon to become. When toned down again, the
ham	unimpeachable patriot appeared in the witness-box.
spam	Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leader's lead, examined the
spam	patriot: John Barsad, gentleman, by name. The story of his pure soul was
ham	exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be--perhaps, if
spam	it had a fault, a little too exactly. Having released his noble bosom
spam	of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawn himself, but that the
ham	wigged gentleman with the papers before him, sitting not far from Mr.
ham	Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions. The wigged gentleman sitting
spam	opposite, still looking at the ceiling of the court.
ham	Had he ever been a spy himself? No, he scorned the base insinuation.
ham	What did he live upon? His property. Where was his property? He didn't
ham	precisely remember where it was. What was it? No business of anybody's.
ham	Had he inherited it? Yes, he had. From whom? Distant relation. Very
spam	distant? Rather. Ever been in prison? Certainly not. Never in a debtors'
ham	prison? Didn't see what that had to do with it. Never in a debtors'
spam	prison?--Come, once again. Never? Yes. How many times? Two or three
spam	times. Not five or six? Perhaps. Of what profession? Gentleman. Ever
spam	been kicked? Might have been. Frequently? No. Ever kicked downstairs?
spam	Decidedly not; once received a kick on the top of a staircase, and fell
spam	downstairs of his own accord. Kicked on that occasion for cheating at
spam	dice? Something to that effect was said by the intoxicated liar who
ham	committed the assault, but it was not true. Swear it was not true?
ham	Positively. Ever live by cheating at play? Never. Ever live by play? Not
ham	more than other gentlemen do. Ever borrow money of the prisoner? Yes.
spam	Ever pay him? No. Was not this intimacy with the prisoner, in reality a
spam	very slight one, forced upon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?
ham	No. Sure he saw the prisoner with these lists? Certain. Knew no more
ham	about the lists? No. Had not procured them himself, for instance? No.
ham	Expect to get anything by this evidence? No. Not in regular government
ham	pay and employment, to lay traps? Oh dear no. Or to do anything? Oh dear
spam	no. Swear that? Over and over again. No motives but motives of sheer
spam	patriotism? None whatever.
ham	The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at a
ham	great rate. He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith and
ham	simplicity, four years ago. He had asked the prisoner, aboard the Calais
spam	packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner had engaged him.
spam	He had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellow as an act of
spam	charity--never thought of such a thing. He began to have suspicions of
ham	the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soon afterwards. In arranging
ham	his clothes, while travelling, he had seen similar lists to these in the
ham	prisoner's pockets, over and over again. He had taken these lists from
ham	the drawer of the prisoner's desk. He had not put them there first. He
spam	had seen the prisoner show these identical lists to French gentlemen
spam	at Calais, and similar lists to French gentlemen, both at Calais and
ham	Boulogne. He loved his country, and couldn't bear it, and had given
spam	information. He had never been suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot;
spam	he had been maligned respecting a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be
spam	only a plated one. He had known the last witness seven or eight years;
ham	that was merely a coincidence. He didn't call it a particularly curious
ham	coincidence; most coincidences were curious. Neither did he call it a
spam	curious coincidence that true patriotism was _his_ only motive too. He
ham	was a true Briton, and hoped there were many like him.
ham	The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr. Jarvis
spam	Lorry.
ham	"Mr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellson's bank?"
ham	"I am."
spam	"On a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred and
spam	seventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London and
ham	Dover by the mail?"
spam	"It did."
ham	"Were there any other passengers in the mail?"
spam	"Two."
ham	"Did they alight on the road in the course of the night?"
ham	"They did."
ham	"Mr. Lorry, look upon the prisoner. Was he one of those two passengers?"
ham	"I cannot undertake to say that he was."
ham	"Does he resemble either of these two passengers?"
spam	"Both were so wrapped up, and the night was so dark, and we were all so
ham	reserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that."
spam	"Mr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner. Supposing him wrapped up as
spam	those two passengers were, is there anything in his bulk and stature to
spam	render it unlikely that he was one of them?"
spam	"No."
spam	"You will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of them?"
ham	"No."
spam	"So at least you say he may have been one of them?"
spam	"Yes. Except that I remember them both to have been--like
spam	myself--timorous of highwaymen, and the prisoner has not a timorous
ham	air."
spam	"Did you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?"
ham	"I certainly have seen that."
ham	"Mr. Lorry, look once more upon the prisoner. Have you seen him, to your
ham	certain knowledge, before?"
ham	"I have."
ham	"When?"
ham	"I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais, the
spam	prisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I returned, and made the
ham	voyage with me."
spam	"At what hour did he come on board?"
ham	"At a little after midnight."
ham	"In the dead of the night. Was he the only passenger who came on board
spam	at that untimely hour?"
spam	"He happened to be the only one."
ham	"Never mind about 'happening,' Mr. Lorry. He was the only passenger who
ham	came on board in the dead of the night?"
ham	"He was."
ham	"Were you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?"
spam	"With two companions. A gentleman and lady. They are here."
spam	"They are here. Had you any conversation with the prisoner?"
ham	"Hardly any. The weather was stormy, and the passage long and rough, and
ham	I lay on a sofa, almost from shore to shore."
ham	"Miss Manette!"
ham	The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were now
spam	turned again, stood up where she had sat. Her father rose with her, and
spam	kept her hand drawn through his arm.
ham	"Miss Manette, look upon the prisoner."
ham	To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty, was
ham	far more trying to the accused than to be confronted with all the crowd.
spam	Standing, as it were, apart with her on the edge of his grave, not all
ham	the staring curiosity that looked on, could, for the moment, nerve him
ham	to remain quite still. His hurried right hand parcelled out the herbs
ham	before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a garden; and his efforts
ham	to control and steady his breathing shook the lips from which the colour
spam	rushed to his heart. The buzz of the great flies was loud again.
ham	"Miss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?"
ham	"Yes, sir."
spam	"Where?"
ham	"On board of the packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on the same
ham	occasion."
spam	"You are the young lady just now referred to?"
spam	"O! most unhappily, I am!"
spam	The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musical voice
spam	of the Judge, as he said something fiercely: "Answer the questions put
spam	to you, and make no remark upon them."
ham	"Miss Manette, had you any conversation with the prisoner on that
spam	passage across the Channel?"
spam	"Yes, sir."
spam	"Recall it."
spam	In the midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began: "When the
ham	gentleman came on board--"
ham	"Do you mean the prisoner?" inquired the Judge, knitting his brows.
ham	"Yes, my Lord."
spam	"Then say the prisoner."
ham	"When the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father," turning
ham	her eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, "was much fatigued
ham	and in a very weak state of health. My father was so reduced that I was
spam	afraid to take him out of the air, and I had made a bed for him on the
spam	deck near the cabin steps, and I sat on the deck at his side to take
ham	care of him. There were no other passengers that night, but we four.
ham	The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to advise me how I could
spam	shelter my father from the wind and weather, better than I had done. I
spam	had not known how to do it well, not understanding how the wind would
spam	set when we were out of the harbour. He did it for me. He expressed
spam	great gentleness and kindness for my father's state, and I am sure he
ham	felt it. That was the manner of our beginning to speak together."
spam	"Let me interrupt you for a moment. Had he come on board alone?"
spam	"No."
ham	"How many were with him?"
spam	"Two French gentlemen."
spam	"Had they conferred together?"
ham	"They had conferred together until the last moment, when it was
spam	necessary for the French gentlemen to be landed in their boat."
ham	"Had any papers been handed about among them, similar to these lists?"
ham	"Some papers had been handed about among them, but I don't know what
spam	papers."
spam	"Like these in shape and size?"
ham	"Possibly, but indeed I don't know, although they stood whispering very
ham	near to me: because they stood at the top of the cabin steps to have the
spam	light of the lamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp, and they
ham	spoke very low, and I did not hear what they said, and saw only that
ham	they looked at papers."
ham	"Now, to the prisoner's conversation, Miss Manette."
spam	"The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me--which arose out
ham	of my helpless situation--as he was kind, and good, and useful to my
ham	father. I hope," bursting into tears, "I may not repay him by doing him
spam	harm to-day."
ham	Buzzing from the blue-flies.
spam	"Miss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that
spam	you give the evidence which it is your duty to give--which you must
spam	give--and which you cannot escape from giving--with great unwillingness,
ham	he is the only person present in that condition. Please to go on."
ham	"He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and
ham	difficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that he was
spam	therefore travelling under an assumed name. He said that this business
spam	had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might, at intervals,
spam	take him backwards and forwards between France and England for a long
ham	time to come."
ham	"Did he say anything about America, Miss Manette? Be particular."
spam	"He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said
ham	that, so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on
spam	England's part. He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George
ham	Washington might gain almost as great a name in history as George the
spam	Third. But there was no harm in his way of saying this: it was said
spam	laughingly, and to beguile the time."
spam	Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief actor in
spam	a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will be
ham	unconsciously imitated by the spectators. Her forehead was painfully
spam	anxious and intent as she gave this evidence, and, in the pauses when
spam	she stopped for the Judge to write it down, watched its effect upon
spam	the counsel for and against. Among the lookers-on there was the same
spam	expression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that a great majority
spam	of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors reflecting the witness,
ham	when the Judge looked up from his notes to glare at that tremendous
spam	heresy about George Washington.
ham	Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it
spam	necessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call the young lady's
spam	father, Doctor Manette. Who was called accordingly.
spam	"Doctor Manette, look upon the prisoner. Have you ever seen him before?"
spam	"Once. When he called at my lodgings in London. Some three years, or
spam	three years and a half ago."
spam	"Can you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board the packet, or
spam	speak to his conversation with your daughter?"
ham	"Sir, I can do neither."
ham	"Is there any particular and special reason for your being unable to do
spam	either?"
ham	He answered, in a low voice, "There is."
ham	"Has it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, without
ham	trial, or even accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?"
ham	He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, "A long imprisonment."
spam	"Were you newly released on the occasion in question?"
spam	"They tell me so."
ham	"Have you no remembrance of the occasion?"
spam	"None. My mind is a blank, from some time--I cannot even say what
ham	time--when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes, to the
spam	time when I found myself living in London with my dear daughter
ham	here. She had become familiar to me, when a gracious God restored
spam	my faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how she had become
ham	familiar. I have no remembrance of the process."
ham	Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and the father and daughter sat down
spam	together.
ham	A singular circumstance then arose in the case. The object in hand being
spam	to show that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter untracked,
spam	in the Dover mail on that Friday night in November five years ago, and
ham	got out of the mail in the night, as a blind, at a place where he did
spam	not remain, but from which he travelled back some dozen miles or more,
spam	to a garrison and dockyard, and there collected information; a witness
ham	was called to identify him as having been at the precise time required,
spam	in the coffee-room of an hotel in that garrison-and-dockyard town,
spam	waiting for another person. The prisoner's counsel was cross-examining
ham	this witness with no result, except that he had never seen the prisoner
ham	on any other occasion, when the wigged gentleman who had all this time
spam	been looking at the ceiling of the court, wrote a word or two on a
spam	little piece of paper, screwed it up, and tossed it to him. Opening
ham	this piece of paper in the next pause, the counsel looked with great
ham	attention and curiosity at the prisoner.
ham	"You say again you are quite sure that it was the prisoner?"
ham	The witness was quite sure.
spam	"Did you ever see anybody very like the prisoner?"
ham	Not so like (the witness said) as that he could be mistaken.
ham	"Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there," pointing
spam	to him who had tossed the paper over, "and then look well upon the
spam	prisoner. How say you? Are they very like each other?"
spam	Allowing for my learned friend's appearance being careless and slovenly
spam	if not debauched, they were sufficiently like each other to surprise,
ham	not only the witness, but everybody present, when they were thus brought
spam	into comparison. My Lord being prayed to bid my learned friend lay aside
ham	his wig, and giving no very gracious consent, the likeness became
spam	much more remarkable. My Lord inquired of Mr. Stryver (the prisoner's
ham	counsel), whether they were next to try Mr. Carton (name of my learned
spam	friend) for treason? But, Mr. Stryver replied to my Lord, no; but he
ham	would ask the witness to tell him whether what happened once, might
spam	happen twice; whether he would have been so confident if he had seen
spam	this illustration of his rashness sooner, whether he would be so
spam	confident, having seen it; and more. The upshot of which, was, to smash
ham	this witness like a crockery vessel, and shiver his part of the case to
ham	useless lumber.
ham	Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his
spam	fingers in his following of the evidence. He had now to attend while Mr.
ham	Stryver fitted the prisoner's case on the jury, like a compact suit
ham	of clothes; showing them how the patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy and
ham	traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of the greatest
spam	scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas--which he certainly did look
spam	rather like. How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his friend and partner,
spam	and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of those forgers and false
spam	swearers had rested on the prisoner as a victim, because some family
spam	affairs in France, he being of French extraction, did require his making
ham	those passages across the Channel--though what those affairs were, a
spam	consideration for others who were near and dear to him, forbade him,
ham	even for his life, to disclose. How the evidence that had been warped
ham	and wrested from the young lady, whose anguish in giving it they
spam	had witnessed, came to nothing, involving the mere little innocent
spam	gallantries and politenesses likely to pass between any young gentleman
ham	and young lady so thrown together;--with the exception of that
spam	reference to George Washington, which was altogether too extravagant and
spam	impossible to be regarded in any other light than as a monstrous joke.
ham	How it would be a weakness in the government to break down in this
ham	attempt to practise for popularity on the lowest national antipathies
spam	and fears, and therefore Mr. Attorney-General had made the most of it;
spam	how, nevertheless, it rested upon nothing, save that vile and infamous
spam	character of evidence too often disfiguring such cases, and of which the
spam	State Trials of this country were full. But, there my Lord interposed
spam	(with as grave a face as if it had not been true), saying that he could
ham	not sit upon that Bench and suffer those allusions.
ham	Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next to
spam	attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of clothes Mr.
ham	Stryver had fitted on the jury, inside out; showing how Barsad and
ham	Cly were even a hundred times better than he had thought them, and the
ham	prisoner a hundred times worse. Lastly, came my Lord himself, turning
ham	the suit of clothes, now inside out, now outside in, but on the whole
spam	decidedly trimming and shaping them into grave-clothes for the prisoner.
ham	And now, the jury turned to consider, and the great flies swarmed again.
spam	Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court,
ham	changed neither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement.
spam	While his learned friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him,
spam	whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time glanced
spam	anxiously at the jury; while all the spectators moved more or less, and
spam	grouped themselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose from his seat,
spam	and slowly paced up and down his platform, not unattended by a suspicion
spam	in the minds of the audience that his state was feverish; this one man
spam	sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, his untidy wig put
ham	on just as it had happened to light on his head after its removal, his
spam	hands in his pockets, and his eyes on the ceiling as they had been all
ham	day. Something especially reckless in his demeanour, not only gave him
spam	a disreputable look, but so diminished the strong resemblance he
spam	undoubtedly bore to the prisoner (which his momentary earnestness,
spam	when they were compared together, had strengthened), that many of the
spam	lookers-on, taking note of him now, said to one another they would
ham	hardly have thought the two were so alike. Mr. Cruncher made the
spam	observation to his next neighbour, and added, "I'd hold half a guinea
spam	that _he_ don't get no law-work to do. Don't look like the sort of one
ham	to get any, do he?"
ham	Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than he
ham	appeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette's head dropped upon
spam	her father's breast, he was the first to see it, and to say audibly:
spam	"Officer! look to that young lady. Help the gentleman to take her out.
ham	Don't you see she will fall!"
spam	There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much
spam	sympathy with her father. It had evidently been a great distress to
spam	him, to have the days of his imprisonment recalled. He had shown
ham	strong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that pondering or
ham	brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavy cloud,
spam	ever since. As he passed out, the jury, who had turned back and paused a
spam	moment, spoke, through their foreman.
spam	They were not agreed, and wished to retire. My Lord (perhaps with George
ham	Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were not agreed,
spam	but signified his pleasure that they should retire under watch and ward,
spam	and retired himself. The trial had lasted all day, and the lamps in
spam	the court were now being lighted. It began to be rumoured that the
ham	jury would be out a long while. The spectators dropped off to get
spam	refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the back of the dock, and sat
spam	down.
ham	Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father went out,
ham	now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry: who, in the slackened interest,
spam	could easily get near him.
spam	"Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can. But, keep in the
spam	way. You will be sure to hear when the jury come in. Don't be a moment
spam	behind them, for I want you to take the verdict back to the bank. You
ham	are the quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar long
ham	before I can."
ham	Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it in
ham	acknowledgment of this communication and a shilling. Mr. Carton came up
spam	at the moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm.
ham	"How is the young lady?"
ham	"She is greatly distressed; but her father is comforting her, and she
ham	feels the better for being out of court."
spam	"I'll tell the prisoner so. It won't do for a respectable bank gentleman
spam	like you, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know."
ham	Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the point
spam	in his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the bar.
ham	The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him, all
spam	eyes, ears, and spikes.
ham	"Mr. Darnay!"
spam	The prisoner came forward directly.
spam	"You will naturally be anxious to hear of the witness, Miss Manette. She
ham	will do very well. You have seen the worst of her agitation."
spam	"I am deeply sorry to have been the cause of it. Could you tell her so
ham	for me, with my fervent acknowledgments?"
spam	"Yes, I could. I will, if you ask it."
spam	Mr. Carton's manner was so careless as to be almost insolent. He stood,
spam	half turned from the prisoner, lounging with his elbow against the bar.
ham	"I do ask it. Accept my cordial thanks."
ham	"What," said Carton, still only half turned towards him, "do you expect,
ham	Mr. Darnay?"
spam	"The worst."
ham	"It's the wisest thing to expect, and the likeliest. But I think their
spam	withdrawing is in your favour."
spam	Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard no
spam	more: but left them--so like each other in feature, so unlike each other
spam	in manner--standing side by side, both reflected in the glass above
spam	them.
ham	An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal crowded
ham	passages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale.
spam	The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking that
ham	refection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapid tide
ham	of people setting up the stairs that led to the court, carried him along
ham	with them.
ham	"Jerry! Jerry!" Mr. Lorry was already calling at the door when he got
ham	there.
spam	"Here, sir! It's a fight to get back again. Here I am, sir!"
ham	Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through the throng. "Quick! Have you got
spam	it?"
spam	"Yes, sir."
spam	Hastily written on the paper was the word "ACQUITTED."
ham	"If you had sent the message, 'Recalled to Life,' again," muttered
ham	Jerry, as he turned, "I should have known what you meant, this time."
ham	He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything else,
spam	until he was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd came pouring out
ham	with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and a loud buzz
ham	swept into the street as if the baffled blue-flies were dispersing in
spam	search of other carrion.
spam	IV. Congratulatory
ham	From the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of the
ham	human stew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off, when
spam	Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, the solicitor
spam	for the defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood gathered round Mr.
ham	Charles Darnay--just released--congratulating him on his escape from
spam	death.
spam	It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise
spam	in Doctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, the
spam	shoemaker of the garret in Paris. Yet, no one could have looked at him
ham	twice, without looking again: even though the opportunity of observation
ham	had not extended to the mournful cadence of his low grave voice, and
ham	to the abstraction that overclouded him fitfully, without any apparent
spam	reason. While one external cause, and that a reference to his long
ham	lingering agony, would always--as on the trial--evoke this condition
ham	from the depths of his soul, it was also in its nature to arise of
spam	itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible to those
ham	unacquainted with his story as if they had seen the shadow of the actual
ham	Bastille thrown upon him by a summer sun, when the substance was three
spam	hundred miles away.
spam	Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding from
ham	his mind. She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyond his
spam	misery, and to a Present beyond his misery: and the sound of her voice,
spam	the light of her face, the touch of her hand, had a strong beneficial
spam	influence with him almost always. Not absolutely always, for she could
ham	recall some occasions on which her power had failed; but they were few
ham	and slight, and she believed them over.
spam	Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had turned
spam	to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked. Mr. Stryver, a man of little
ham	more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was, stout,
spam	loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy, had a pushing
ham	way of shouldering himself (morally and physically) into companies and
spam	conversations, that argued well for his shouldering his way up in life.
spam	He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at his
ham	late client to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorry clean
spam	out of the group: "I am glad to have brought you off with honour, Mr.
spam	Darnay. It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous; but not the
spam	less likely to succeed on that account."
spam	"You have laid me under an obligation to you for life--in two senses,"
spam	said his late client, taking his hand.
spam	"I have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good as
ham	another man's, I believe."
spam	It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, "Much better," Mr. Lorry
ham	said it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the interested
ham	object of squeezing himself back again.
spam	"You think so?" said Mr. Stryver. "Well! you have been present all day,
spam	and you ought to know. You are a man of business, too."
spam	"And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the law had
spam	now shouldered back into the group, just as he had previously shouldered
spam	him out of it--"as such I will appeal to Doctor Manette, to break up
ham	this conference and order us all to our homes. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr.
spam	Darnay has had a terrible day, we are worn out."
ham	"Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's work to
spam	do yet. Speak for yourself."
spam	"I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and for
spam	Miss Lucie, and--Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?"
ham	He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her father.
ham	His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at
spam	Darnay: an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust,
spam	not even unmixed with fear. With this strange expression on him his
ham	thoughts had wandered away.
ham	"My father," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.
ham	He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her.
ham	"Shall we go home, my father?"
ham	With a long breath, he answered "Yes."
ham	The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under the
ham	impression--which he himself had originated--that he would not be
ham	released that night. The lights were nearly all extinguished in the
ham	passages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,
ham	and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interest of
ham	gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeople it.
spam	Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passed into
spam	the open air. A hackney-coach was called, and the father and daughter
spam	departed in it.
ham	Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way back
ham	to the robing-room. Another person, who had not joined the group, or
spam	interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been leaning
ham	against the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently strolled
ham	out after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove away. He now
spam	stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon the pavement.
spam	"So, Mr. Lorry! Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"
spam	Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in the day's
spam	proceedings; nobody had known of it. He was unrobed, and was none the
spam	better for it in appearance.
ham	"If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when the
spam	business mind is divided between good-natured impulse and business
spam	appearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."
ham	Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that before,
spam	sir. We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters. We
ham	have to think of the House more than ourselves."
ham	"_I_ know, _I_ know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly. "Don't be
ham	nettled, Mr. Lorry. You are as good as another, I have no doubt: better,
spam	I dare say."
ham	"And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I really don't
spam	know what you have to do with the matter. If you'll excuse me, as very
ham	much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it is your
spam	business."
ham	"Business! Bless you, _I_ have no business," said Mr. Carton.
ham	"It is a pity you have not, sir."
ham	"I think so, too."
ham	"If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it."
spam	"Lord love you, no!--I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton.
ham	"Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,
ham	"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing. And, sir,
ham	if business imposes its restraints and its silences and impediments, Mr.
spam	Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how to make allowance
ham	for that circumstance. Mr. Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir!
spam	I hope you have been this day preserved for a prosperous and happy
spam	life.--Chair there!"
ham	Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with the barrister, Mr.
spam	Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson's. Carton,
spam	who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite sober, laughed
ham	then, and turned to Darnay:
ham	"This is a strange chance that throws you and me together. This must
spam	be a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart on
spam	these street stones?"
spam	"I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this world
spam	again."
ham	"I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty far
ham	advanced on your way to another. You speak faintly."
ham	"I begin to think I _am_ faint."
ham	"Then why the devil don't you dine? I dined, myself, while those
ham	numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to--this, or
spam	some other. Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at."
ham	Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill to
spam	Fleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern. Here, they were
spam	shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting
spam	his strength with a good plain dinner and good wine: while Carton sat
spam	opposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of port
ham	before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him.
spam	"Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again, Mr.
spam	Darnay?"
ham	"I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far
spam	mended as to feel that."
spam	"It must be an immense satisfaction!"
ham	He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again: which was a large
ham	one.
spam	"As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to it.
ham	It has no good in it for me--except wine like this--nor I for it. So we
spam	are not much alike in that particular. Indeed, I begin to think we are
spam	not much alike in any particular, you and I."
spam	Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with
ham	this Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay was
ham	at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all.
ham	"Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you call a
spam	health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?"
spam	"What health? What toast?"
ham	"Why, it's on the tip of your tongue. It ought to be, it must be, I'll
ham	swear it's there."
spam	"Miss Manette, then!"
ham	"Miss Manette, then!"
ham	Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast, Carton
ham	flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it shivered to
ham	pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another.
spam	"That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr. Darnay!"
spam	he said, filling his new goblet.
spam	A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were the answer.
ham	"That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by! How does it
ham	feel? Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be the object of such
spam	sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"
spam	Again Darnay answered not a word.
spam	"She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it her. Not
ham	that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."
spam	The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this
spam	disagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in the
spam	strait of the day. He turned the dialogue to that point, and thanked him
ham	for it.
spam	"I neither want any thanks, nor merit any," was the careless rejoinder.
spam	"It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don't know why I did
spam	it, in the second. Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question."
ham	"Willingly, and a small return for your good offices."
spam	"Do you think I particularly like you?"
ham	"Really, Mr. Carton," returned the other, oddly disconcerted, "I have
spam	not asked myself the question."
ham	"But ask yourself the question now."
ham	"You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do."
spam	"_I_ don't think I do," said Carton. "I begin to have a very good
spam	opinion of your understanding."
spam	"Nevertheless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, "there is
ham	nothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and our
ham	parting without ill-blood on either side."
spam	Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang. "Do you call the whole
spam	reckoning?" said Carton. On his answering in the affirmative, "Then
spam	bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and wake me at
ham	ten."
ham	The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night.
spam	Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something of a threat
ham	of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr. Darnay: you think
ham	I am drunk?"
spam	"I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton."
spam	"Think? You know I have been drinking."
ham	"Since I must say so, I know it."
ham	"Then you shall likewise know why. I am a disappointed drudge, sir. I
ham	care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me."
spam	"Much to be regretted. You might have used your talents better."
ham	"May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not. Don't let your sober face elate you,
spam	however; you don't know what it may come to. Good night!"
ham	When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to a
spam	glass that hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in it.
ham	"Do you particularly like the man?" he muttered, at his own image; "why
spam	should you particularly like a man who resembles you? There is nothing
spam	in you to like; you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change you have
spam	made in yourself! A good reason for taking to a man, that he shows you
spam	what you have fallen away from, and what you might have been! Change
spam	places with him, and would you have been looked at by those blue eyes as
ham	he was, and commiserated by that agitated face as he was? Come on, and
ham	have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow."
ham	He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a few
ham	minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling over the
ham	table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down upon him.
ham	V. The Jackal
spam	Those were drinking days, and most men drank hard. So very great is
spam	the improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderate
spam	statement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallow
ham	in the course of a night, without any detriment to his reputation as a
ham	perfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a ridiculous exaggeration.
spam	The learned profession of the law was certainly not behind any other
spam	learned profession in its Bacchanalian propensities; neither was Mr.
ham	Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to a large and lucrative
ham	practice, behind his compeers in this particular, any more than in the
ham	drier parts of the legal race.
ham	A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr. Stryver had
spam	begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the ladder on which
ham	he mounted. Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon their favourite,
ham	specially, to their longing arms; and shouldering itself towards the
ham	visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King's Bench, the
spam	florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might be daily seen, bursting out of
ham	the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower pushing its way at the sun from
ham	among a rank garden-full of flaring companions.
spam	It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib
spam	man, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that
spam	faculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which is
ham	among the most striking and necessary of the advocate's accomplishments.
ham	But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to this. The more
ham	business he got, the greater his power seemed to grow of getting at its
spam	pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat carousing with Sydney
ham	Carton, he always had his points at his fingers' ends in the morning.
ham	Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's great
ham	ally. What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas,
ham	might have floated a king's ship. Stryver never had a case in hand,
spam	anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his pockets, staring
ham	at the ceiling of the court; they went the same Circuit, and even there
spam	they prolonged their usual orgies late into the night, and Carton was
spam	rumoured to be seen at broad day, going home stealthily and unsteadily
spam	to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat. At last, it began to get about,
spam	among such as were interested in the matter, that although Sydney Carton
spam	would never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and that he
ham	rendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity.
spam	"Ten o'clock, sir," said the man at the tavern, whom he had charged to
spam	wake him--"ten o'clock, sir."
spam	"_What's_ the matter?"
ham	"Ten o'clock, sir."
spam	"What do you mean? Ten o'clock at night?"
ham	"Yes, sir. Your honour told me to call you."
ham	"Oh! I remember. Very well, very well."
spam	After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man
spam	dexterously combated by stirring the fire continuously for five minutes,
ham	he got up, tossed his hat on, and walked out. He turned into the Temple,
spam	and, having revived himself by twice pacing the pavements of King's
ham	Bench-walk and Paper-buildings, turned into the Stryver chambers.
ham	The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone
ham	home, and the Stryver principal opened the door. He had his slippers on,
ham	and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease. He
spam	had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the eyes, which
spam	may be observed in all free livers of his class, from the portrait of
spam	Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under various disguises of
spam	Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age.
spam	"You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver.
ham	"About the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."
ham	They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers,
ham	where there was a blazing fire. A kettle steamed upon the hob, and in
ham	the midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wine upon
ham	it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons.
spam	"You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney."
ham	"Two to-night, I think. I have been dining with the day's client; or
spam	seeing him dine--it's all one!"
ham	"That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon the
spam	identification. How did you come by it? When did it strike you?"
ham	"I thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I should have
spam	been much the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."
spam	Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.
spam	"You and your luck, Sydney! Get to work, get to work."
ham	Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoining
ham	room, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towel
ham	or two. Steeping the towels in the water, and partially wringing them
spam	out, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat down
ham	at the table, and said, "Now I am ready!"
spam	"Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr. Stryver,
spam	gaily, as he looked among his papers.
spam	"How much?"
spam	"Only two sets of them."
ham	"Give me the worst first."
spam	"There they are, Sydney. Fire away!"
ham	"He has paid all, Monseigneur. He is dead."
ham	"Well! He is quiet. Can I restore him to you?"
spam	"Alas, no, Monseigneur! But he lies yonder, under a little heap of poor
spam	grass."
spam	"Well?"
spam	"Monseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?"
ham	"Again, well?"
ham	She looked an old woman, but was young. Her manner was one of passionate
spam	grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands together
spam	with wild energy, and laid one of them on the carriage-door--tenderly,
ham	caressingly, as if it had been a human breast, and could be expected to
ham	feel the appealing touch.
spam	"Monseigneur, hear me! Monseigneur, hear my petition! My husband died of
spam	want; so many die of want; so many more will die of want."
ham	"Again, well? Can I feed them?"
ham	"Monseigneur, the good God knows; but I don't ask it. My petition is,
spam	that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband's name, may be placed
spam	over him to show where he lies. Otherwise, the place will be quickly
ham	forgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of the same malady, I
ham	shall be laid under some other heap of poor grass. Monseigneur, they
ham	are so many, they increase so fast, there is so much want. Monseigneur!
spam	Monseigneur!"
ham	The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had broken into
spam	a brisk trot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she was left far
spam	behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, was rapidly
spam	diminishing the league or two of distance that remained between him and
spam	his chateau.
ham	The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and rose, as
spam	the rain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and toil-worn group
spam	at the fountain not far away; to whom the mender of roads, with the aid
ham	of the blue cap without which he was nothing, still enlarged upon his
ham	man like a spectre, as long as they could bear it. By degrees, as they
spam	could bear no more, they dropped off one by one, and lights twinkled
spam	in little casements; which lights, as the casements darkened, and more
spam	stars came out, seemed to have shot up into the sky instead of having
ham	been extinguished.
spam	The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging trees,
ham	was upon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow was exchanged
spam	for the light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped, and the great door
ham	of his chateau was opened to him.
spam	"Monsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?"
ham	"Monseigneur, not yet."
spam	IX. The Gorgon's Head
spam	It was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the Marquis,
ham	with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps of
spam	staircase meeting in a stone terrace before the principal door. A stony
spam	business altogether, with heavy stone balustrades, and stone urns, and
spam	stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads of lions, in
ham	all directions. As if the Gorgon's head had surveyed it, when it was
spam	finished, two centuries ago.
spam	Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeau
ham	preceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darkness
spam	to elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great pile
spam	of stable building away among the trees. All else was so quiet, that the
spam	flambeau carried up the steps, and the other flambeau held at the great
spam	door, burnt as if they were in a close room of state, instead of being
spam	in the open night-air. Other sound than the owl's voice there was none,
ham	save the falling of a fountain into its stone basin; for, it was one of
spam	those dark nights that hold their breath by the hour together, and then
ham	heave a long low sigh, and hold their breath again.
spam	The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis crossed a
ham	hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of the chase;
ham	grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, of which many a
ham	peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt the weight when his lord
spam	was angry.
spam	Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for the night,
spam	Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before, went up
ham	the staircase to a door in a corridor. This thrown open, admitted him
spam	to his own private apartment of three rooms: his bed-chamber and two
spam	others. High vaulted rooms with cool uncarpeted floors, great dogs upon
ham	the hearths for the burning of wood in winter time, and all luxuries
ham	befitting the state of a marquis in a luxurious age and country.
spam	The fashion of the last Louis but one, of the line that was never to
spam	break--the fourteenth Louis--was conspicuous in their rich furniture;
spam	but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrations of old
spam	pages in the history of France.
spam	A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a round
ham	room, in one of the chateau's four extinguisher-topped towers. A small
spam	lofty room, with its window wide open, and the wooden jalousie-blinds
ham	closed, so that the dark night only showed in slight horizontal lines of
ham	black, alternating with their broad lines of stone colour.
ham	"My nephew," said the Marquis, glancing at the supper preparation; "they
spam	said he was not arrived."
spam	Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur.
ham	"Ah! It is not probable he will arrive to-night; nevertheless, leave the
spam	table as it is. I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour."
spam	In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone to his
spam	sumptuous and choice supper. His chair was opposite to the window, and
spam	he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass of Bordeaux to his
ham	lips, when he put it down.
spam	"What is that?" he calmly asked, looking with attention at the
ham	horizontal lines of black and stone colour.
ham	"Monseigneur? That?"
ham	"Outside the blinds. Open the blinds."
spam	It was done.
spam	"Well?"
ham	"Monseigneur, it is nothing. The trees and the night are all that are
ham	here."
spam	The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked out into
ham	the vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him, looking round
spam	for instructions.
spam	"Good," said the imperturbable master. "Close them again."
spam	That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper. He was
spam	half way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in his hand,
ham	hearing the sound of wheels. It came on briskly, and came up to the
spam	front of the chateau.
ham	"Ask who is arrived."
spam	It was the nephew of Monseigneur. He had been some few leagues behind
ham	Monseigneur, early in the afternoon. He had diminished the distance
spam	rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur on the road.
spam	He had heard of Monseigneur, at the posting-houses, as being before him.
ham	He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then and
ham	there, and that he was prayed to come to it. In a little while he came.
ham	He had been known in England as Charles Darnay.
ham	Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but they did not shake
ham	hands.
ham	"You left Paris yesterday, sir?" he said to Monseigneur, as he took his
spam	seat at table.
ham	"Yesterday. And you?"
ham	"I come direct."
spam	"From London?"
ham	"Yes."
ham	"You have been a long time coming," said the Marquis, with a smile.
spam	"On the contrary; I come direct."
ham	"Pardon me! I mean, not a long time on the journey; a long time
ham	intending the journey."
ham	"I have been detained by"--the nephew stopped a moment in his
spam	answer--"various business."
ham	"Without doubt," said the polished uncle.
ham	So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between them.
ham	When coffee had been served and they were alone together, the nephew,
spam	looking at the uncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was like a
spam	fine mask, opened a conversation.
spam	"I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object that
spam	took me away. It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but it is
ham	a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it would have
spam	sustained me."
ham	"Not to death," said the uncle; "it is not necessary to say, to death."
ham	"I doubt, sir," returned the nephew, "whether, if it had carried me to
ham	the utmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me there."
spam	The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the fine straight
spam	lines in the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; the uncle made a
ham	graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly a slight form of good
ham	breeding that it was not reassuring.
ham	"Indeed, sir," pursued the nephew, "for anything I know, you may have
spam	expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to the suspicious
ham	circumstances that surrounded me."
ham	"No, no, no," said the uncle, pleasantly.
ham	"But, however that may be," resumed the nephew, glancing at him with
spam	deep distrust, "I know that your diplomacy would stop me by any means,
ham	and would know no scruple as to means."
spam	"My friend, I told you so," said the uncle, with a fine pulsation in the
spam	two marks. "Do me the favour to recall that I told you so, long ago."
spam	"I recall it."
spam	"Thank you," said the Marquis--very sweetly indeed.
spam	His tone lingered in the air, almost like the tone of a musical
ham	instrument.
spam	"In effect, sir," pursued the nephew, "I believe it to be at once your
ham	bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a prison in
ham	France here."
ham	"I do not quite understand," returned the uncle, sipping his coffee.
spam	"Dare I ask you to explain?"
ham	"I believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court, and had not
ham	been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter de cachet would
spam	have sent me to some fortress indefinitely."
ham	"It is possible," said the uncle, with great calmness. "For the honour
ham	of the family, I could even resolve to incommode you to that extent.
spam	Pray excuse me!"
ham	"I perceive that, happily for me, the Reception of the day before
spam	yesterday was, as usual, a cold one," observed the nephew.
ham	"I would not say happily, my friend," returned the uncle, with refined
ham	politeness; "I would not be sure of that. A good opportunity for
spam	consideration, surrounded by the advantages of solitude, might influence
spam	your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence it for
spam	yourself. But it is useless to discuss the question. I am, as you say,
spam	at a disadvantage. These little instruments of correction, these gentle
spam	aids to the power and honour of families, these slight favours that
spam	might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now by interest
ham	and importunity. They are sought by so many, and they are granted
spam	(comparatively) to so few! It used not to be so, but France in all such
spam	things is changed for the worse. Our not remote ancestors held the right
ham	of life and death over the surrounding vulgar. From this room, many such
spam	dogs have been taken out to be hanged; in the next room (my bedroom),
spam	one fellow, to our knowledge, was poniarded on the spot for professing
ham	some insolent delicacy respecting his daughter--_his_ daughter? We have
ham	lost many privileges; a new philosophy has become the mode; and the
ham	assertion of our station, in these days, might (I do not go so far as
ham	to say would, but might) cause us real inconvenience. All very bad, very
ham	bad!"
spam	The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head;
spam	as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still
ham	containing himself, that great means of regeneration.
ham	"We have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in the modern
ham	time also," said the nephew, gloomily, "that I believe our name to be
spam	more detested than any name in France."
spam	"Let us hope so," said the uncle. "Detestation of the high is the
ham	involuntary homage of the low."
spam	"There is not," pursued the nephew, in his former tone, "a face I can
ham	look at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me with any
spam	deference on it but the dark deference of fear and slavery."
ham	"A compliment," said the Marquis, "to the grandeur of the family,
spam	merited by the manner in which the family has sustained its grandeur.
spam	Hah!" And he took another gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightly
spam	crossed his legs.
ham	But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his eyes
ham	thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at
ham	him sideways with a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness,
spam	and dislike, than was comportable with its wearer's assumption of
spam	indifference.
spam	"Repression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of fear
spam	and slavery, my friend," observed the Marquis, "will keep the dogs
ham	obedient to the whip, as long as this roof," looking up to it, "shuts
ham	out the sky."
spam	That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed. If a picture of the
spam	chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty like it as
spam	they too were to be a very few years hence, could have been shown to
spam	him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim his own from
spam	the ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked rains. As for the roof
ham	he vaunted, he might have found _that_ shutting out the sky in a new
spam	way--to wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodies into which its lead
ham	was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousand muskets.
spam	"Meanwhile," said the Marquis, "I will preserve the honour and repose
spam	of the family, if you will not. But you must be fatigued. Shall we
ham	terminate our conference for the night?"
ham	"A moment more."
ham	"An hour, if you please."
spam	"Sir," said the nephew, "we have done wrong, and are reaping the fruits
ham	of wrong."
spam	"_We_ have done wrong?" repeated the Marquis, with an inquiring smile,
ham	and delicately pointing, first to his nephew, then to himself.
spam	"Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much account
spam	to both of us, in such different ways. Even in my father's time, we did
spam	a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who came between us and
spam	our pleasure, whatever it was. Why need I speak of my father's time,
spam	when it is equally yours? Can I separate my father's twin-brother, joint
ham	inheritor, and next successor, from himself?"
spam	"Death has done that!" said the Marquis.
ham	"And has left me," answered the nephew, "bound to a system that is
spam	frightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to
ham	execute the last request of my dear mother's lips, and obey the last
spam	look of my dear mother's eyes, which implored me to have mercy and to
ham	redress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain."
ham	"Seeking them from me, my nephew," said the Marquis, touching him on the
spam	breast with his forefinger--they were now standing by the hearth--"you
ham	will for ever seek them in vain, be assured."
spam	Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was
spam	cruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking
ham	quietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand. Once again he
spam	touched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine point of
ham	a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him through the
ham	body, and said,
ham	"My friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I have
ham	lived."
ham	When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put his
ham	box in his pocket.
ham	"Better to be a rational creature," he added then, after ringing a small
ham	bell on the table, "and accept your natural destiny. But you are lost,
ham	Monsieur Charles, I see."
spam	"This property and France are lost to me," said the nephew, sadly; "I
ham	renounce them."
spam	"Are they both yours to renounce? France may be, but is the property? It
spam	is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?"
ham	"I had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet. If it passed
ham	to me from you, to-morrow--"
spam	"Which I have the vanity to hope is not probable."
spam	"--or twenty years hence--"
spam	"You do me too much honour," said the Marquis; "still, I prefer that
ham	supposition."
spam	"--I would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere. It is little to
spam	relinquish. What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!"
spam	"Hah!" said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room.
ham	"To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity,
ham	under the sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste,
spam	mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger, nakedness,
spam	and suffering."
spam	"Hah!" said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.
ham	"If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better
spam	qualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the
ham	weight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannot leave
spam	it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance, may, in
ham	another generation, suffer less; but it is not for me. There is a curse
ham	on it, and on all this land."
spam	"And you?" said the uncle. "Forgive my curiosity; do you, under your new
spam	philosophy, graciously intend to live?"
ham	"I must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with nobility at
ham	their backs, may have to do some day--work."
ham	"In England, for example?"
ham	"Yes. The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country. The
ham	family name can suffer from me in no other, for I bear it in no other."
ham	The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to be
ham	lighted. It now shone brightly, through the door of communication. The
ham	Marquis looked that way, and listened for the retreating step of his
ham	valet.
ham	"England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you have
spam	prospered there," he observed then, turning his calm face to his nephew
spam	with a smile.
ham	"I have already said, that for my prospering there, I am sensible I may
ham	be indebted to you, sir. For the rest, it is my Refuge."
spam	"They say, those boastful English, that it is the Refuge of many. You
spam	know a compatriot who has found a Refuge there? A Doctor?"
spam	"Yes."
spam	"With a daughter?"
spam	"Yes."
ham	"Yes," said the Marquis. "You are fatigued. Good night!"
ham	As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a secrecy
ham	in his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to those words,
ham	which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly. At the same
spam	time, the thin straight lines of the setting of the eyes, and the thin
spam	straight lips, and the markings in the nose, curved with a sarcasm that
spam	looked handsomely diabolic.
ham	"Yes," repeated the Marquis. "A Doctor with a daughter. Yes. So
spam	commences the new philosophy! You are fatigued. Good night!"
spam	It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face
spam	outside the chateau as to interrogate that face of his. The nephew
spam	looked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door.
ham	"Good night!" said the uncle. "I look to the pleasure of seeing you
spam	again in the morning. Good repose! Light Monsieur my nephew to his
spam	chamber there!--And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will," he
ham	added to himself, before he rang his little bell again, and summoned his
ham	valet to his own bedroom.
spam	The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro in his
spam	loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hot still
ham	night. Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet making no
ham	noise on the floor, he moved like a refined tiger:--looked like some
ham	enchanted marquis of the impenitently wicked sort, in story, whose
spam	periodical change into tiger form was either just going off, or just
ham	coming on.
spam	He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at the
spam	scraps of the day's journey that came unbidden into his mind; the slow
spam	toil up the hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, the mill, the
spam	prison on the crag, the little village in the hollow, the peasants at
ham	the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cap pointing out the
spam	chain under the carriage. That fountain suggested the Paris fountain,
ham	the little bundle lying on the step, the women bending over it, and the
ham	tall man with his arms up, crying, "Dead!"
spam	"I am cool now," said Monsieur the Marquis, "and may go to bed."
ham	So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let his thin
spam	gauze curtains fall around him, and heard the night break its silence
ham	with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep.
spam	The stone faces on the outer walls stared blindly at the black night
spam	for three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in the stables
ham	rattled at their racks, the dogs barked, and the owl made a noise with
spam	very little resemblance in it to the noise conventionally assigned to
spam	the owl by men-poets. But it is the obstinate custom of such creatures
spam	hardly ever to say what is set down for them.
spam	For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion and human,
spam	stared blindly at the night. Dead darkness lay on all the landscape,
spam	dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust on all the roads.
spam	The burial-place had got to the pass that its little heaps of poor grass
ham	were undistinguishable from one another; the figure on the Cross might
spam	have come down, for anything that could be seen of it. In the village,
spam	taxers and taxed were fast asleep. Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as
ham	the starved usually do, and of ease and rest, as the driven slave and
ham	the yoked ox may, its lean inhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and
spam	freed.
spam	The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and the fountain
spam	at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both melting away, like the
ham	minutes that were falling from the spring of Time--through three dark
spam	hours. Then, the grey water of both began to be ghostly in the light,
spam	and the eyes of the stone faces of the chateau were opened.
spam	Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of the still
spam	trees, and poured its radiance over the hill. In the glow, the water
ham	of the chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and the stone faces
ham	crimsoned. The carol of the birds was loud and high, and, on the
ham	weather-beaten sill of the great window of the bed-chamber of Monsieur
spam	the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest song with all its might.
spam	At this, the nearest stone face seemed to stare amazed, and, with open
ham	mouth and dropped under-jaw, looked awe-stricken.
ham	Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village. Casement
ham	windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came forth
ham	shivering--chilled, as yet, by the new sweet air. Then began the rarely
ham	lightened toil of the day among the village population. Some, to the
ham	fountain; some, to the fields; men and women here, to dig and delve; men
spam	and women there, to see to the poor live stock, and lead the bony cows
spam	out, to such pasture as could be found by the roadside. In the church
ham	and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two; attendant on the latter
spam	prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfast among the weeds at its
spam	foot.
spam	The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke gradually and
ham	surely. First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of the chase had been
ham	reddened as of old; then, had gleamed trenchant in the morning sunshine;
spam	now, doors and windows were thrown open, horses in their stables looked
ham	round over their shoulders at the light and freshness pouring in at
spam	doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at iron-grated windows, dogs
ham	pulled hard at their chains, and reared impatient to be loosed.
spam	All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and the
spam	return of morning. Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell of the
ham	chateau, nor the running up and down the stairs; nor the hurried
ham	figures on the terrace; nor the booting and tramping here and there and
ham	everywhere, nor the quick saddling of horses and riding away?
spam	What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads, already
spam	at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day's dinner (not
spam	much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no crow's while to
ham	peck at, on a heap of stones? Had the birds, carrying some grains of it
spam	to a distance, dropped one over him as they sow chance seeds? Whether or
spam	no, the mender of roads ran, on the sultry morning, as if for his life,
spam	down the hill, knee-high in dust, and never stopped till he got to the
spam	fountain.
ham	All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about
ham	in their depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no other
spam	emotions than grim curiosity and surprise. The led cows, hastily brought
spam	in and tethered to anything that would hold them, were looking stupidly
spam	on, or lying down chewing the cud of nothing particularly repaying their
ham	trouble, which they had picked up in their interrupted saunter. Some of
spam	the people of the chateau, and some of those of the posting-house, and
ham	all the taxing authorities, were armed more or less, and were crowded
ham	on the other side of the little street in a purposeless way, that was
spam	highly fraught with nothing. Already, the mender of roads had penetrated
spam	into the midst of a group of fifty particular friends, and was smiting
spam	himself in the breast with his blue cap. What did all this portend,
spam	and what portended the swift hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind
spam	a servant on horseback, and the conveying away of the said Gabelle
ham	(double-laden though the horse was), at a gallop, like a new version of
ham	the German ballad of Leonora?
spam	It portended that there was one stone face too many, up at the chateau.
spam	The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and had added
spam	the one stone face wanting; the stone face for which it had waited
spam	through about two hundred years.
spam	It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis. It was like a fine
spam	mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified. Driven home into the
ham	heart of the stone figure attached to it, was a knife. Round its hilt
ham	was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled:
ham	"Drive him fast to his tomb. This, from Jacques."
spam	X. Two Promises
ham	More months, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr. Charles
ham	Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of the French
spam	language who was conversant with French literature. In this age, he
ham	would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor. He read with
ham	young men who could find any leisure and interest for the study of a
ham	living tongue spoken all over the world, and he cultivated a taste for
ham	its stores of knowledge and fancy. He could write of them, besides, in
ham	sound English, and render them into sound English. Such masters were not
ham	at that time easily found; Princes that had been, and Kings that were
ham	to be, were not yet of the Teacher class, and no ruined nobility had
spam	dropped out of Tellson's ledgers, to turn cooks and carpenters. As a
ham	tutor, whose attainments made the student's way unusually pleasant and
ham	profitable, and as an elegant translator who brought something to his
spam	work besides mere dictionary knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became
spam	known and encouraged. He was well acquainted, more-over, with the
ham	circumstances of his country, and those were of ever-growing interest.
ham	So, with great perseverance and untiring industry, he prospered.
ham	In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, nor
ham	to lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation, he
ham	would not have prospered. He had expected labour, and he found it, and
ham	did it and made the best of it. In this, his prosperity consisted.
ham	A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he
ham	read with undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a
ham	contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek
spam	and Latin through the Custom-house. The rest of his time he passed in
spam	London.
spam	Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these days
spam	when it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a man has
spam	invariably gone one way--Charles Darnay's way--the way of the love of a
ham	woman.
spam	He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger. He had never
spam	heard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate voice;
spam	he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when it was
ham	confronted with his own on the edge of the grave that had been dug for
ham	him. But, he had not yet spoken to her on the subject; the assassination
spam	at the deserted chateau far away beyond the heaving water and the long,
ham	long, dusty roads--the solid stone chateau which had itself become the
spam	mere mist of a dream--had been done a year, and he had never yet, by so
spam	much as a single spoken word, disclosed to her the state of his heart.
ham	That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well. It was again a
ham	summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation,
ham	he turned into the quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunity
ham	of opening his mind to Doctor Manette. It was the close of the summer
spam	day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross.
ham	He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window. The energy
ham	which had at once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravated
ham	their sharpness, had been gradually restored to him. He was now a
spam	very energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose, strength
ham	of resolution, and vigour of action. In his recovered energy he was
ham	sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in the
spam	exercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had never been
ham	frequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.
ham	He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue with
ham	ease, and was equably cheerful. To him, now entered Charles Darnay, at
spam	sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand.
ham	"Charles Darnay! I rejoice to see you. We have been counting on your
ham	return these three or four days past. Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton were
spam	both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due."
ham	"I am obliged to them for their interest in the matter," he answered,
spam	a little coldly as to them, though very warmly as to the Doctor. "Miss
ham	Manette--"
spam	"Is well," said the Doctor, as he stopped short, "and your return will
spam	delight us all. She has gone out on some household matters, but will
ham	soon be home."
spam	"Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home. I took the opportunity of her
spam	being from home, to beg to speak to you."
ham	There was a blank silence.
spam	"Yes?" said the Doctor, with evident constraint. "Bring your chair here,
spam	and speak on."
spam	He complied as to the chair, but appeared to find the speaking on less
spam	easy.
ham	"I have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate here,"
spam	so he at length began, "for some year and a half, that I hope the topic
ham	on which I am about to touch may not--"
spam	He was stayed by the Doctor's putting out his hand to stop him. When he
ham	had kept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:
spam	"Is Lucie the topic?"
spam	"She is."
spam	"It is hard for me to speak of her at any time. It is very hard for me
spam	to hear her spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay."
ham	"It is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love, Doctor
spam	Manette!" he said deferentially.
ham	There was another blank silence before her father rejoined:
spam	"I believe it. I do you justice; I believe it."
ham	His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that it
ham	originated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that Charles
spam	Darnay hesitated.
spam	"Shall I go on, sir?"
ham	Another blank.
ham	"Yes, go on."
ham	"You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestly
ham	I say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart, and
spam	the hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long been
ham	laden. Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly, dearly,
spam	disinterestedly, devotedly. If ever there were love in the world, I love
ham	her. You have loved yourself; let your old love speak for me!"
spam	The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on the
ham	ground. At the last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,
ham	and cried:
ham	"Not that, sir! Let that be! I adjure you, do not recall that!"
spam	His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles
ham	Darnay's ears long after he had ceased. He motioned with the hand he had
spam	extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause. The latter
ham	so received it, and remained silent.
spam	"I ask your pardon," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after some
spam	moments. "I do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be satisfied of it."
spam	He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or
ham	raise his eyes. His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair
ham	overshadowed his face:
ham	"Have you spoken to Lucie?"
ham	"No."
spam	"Nor written?"
ham	"Never."
spam	"It would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your self-denial is
ham	to be referred to your consideration for her father. Her father thanks
spam	you."
ham	He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it.
ham	"I know," said Darnay, respectfully, "how can I fail to know, Doctor
ham	Manette, I who have seen you together from day to day, that between
ham	you and Miss Manette there is an affection so unusual, so touching, so
spam	belonging to the circumstances in which it has been nurtured, that it
spam	can have few parallels, even in the tenderness between a father and
ham	child. I know, Doctor Manette--how can I fail to know--that, mingled
spam	with the affection and duty of a daughter who has become a woman, there
ham	is, in her heart, towards you, all the love and reliance of infancy
ham	itself. I know that, as in her childhood she had no parent, so she is
spam	now devoted to you with all the constancy and fervour of her present
ham	years and character, united to the trustfulness and attachment of the
spam	early days in which you were lost to her. I know perfectly well that if
spam	you had been restored to her from the world beyond this life, you could
spam	hardly be invested, in her sight, with a more sacred character than that
ham	in which you are always with her. I know that when she is clinging to
ham	you, the hands of baby, girl, and woman, all in one, are round your
spam	neck. I know that in loving you she sees and loves her mother at her
ham	own age, sees and loves you at my age, loves her mother broken-hearted,
ham	loves you through your dreadful trial and in your blessed restoration. I
spam	have known this, night and day, since I have known you in your home."
spam	Her father sat silent, with his face bent down. His breathing was a
ham	little quickened; but he repressed all other signs of agitation.
ham	"Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you
ham	with this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne, as
ham	long as it was in the nature of man to do it. I have felt, and do even
ham	now feel, that to bring my love--even mine--between you, is to touch
spam	your history with something not quite so good as itself. But I love her.
ham	Heaven is my witness that I love her!"
ham	"I believe it," answered her father, mournfully. "I have thought so
ham	before now. I believe it."
ham	"But, do not believe," said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful voice
spam	struck with a reproachful sound, "that if my fortune were so cast as
ham	that, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at any time
spam	put any separation between her and you, I could or would breathe a
ham	word of what I now say. Besides that I should know it to be hopeless, I
ham	should know it to be a baseness. If I had any such possibility, even at
spam	a remote distance of years, harboured in my thoughts, and hidden in my
spam	heart--if it ever had been there--if it ever could be there--I could not
ham	now touch this honoured hand."
spam	He laid his own upon it as he spoke.
ham	"No, dear Doctor Manette. Like you, a voluntary exile from France; like
ham	you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and miseries; like
ham	you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions, and trusting
spam	in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes, sharing your
spam	life and home, and being faithful to you to the death. Not to divide
ham	with Lucie her privilege as your child, companion, and friend; but to
ham	come in aid of it, and bind her closer to you, if such a thing can be."
spam	His touch still lingered on her father's hand. Answering the touch for a
spam	moment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon the arms of
spam	his chair, and looked up for the first time since the beginning of the
spam	conference. A struggle was evidently in his face; a struggle with that
spam	occasional look which had a tendency in it to dark doubt and dread.
spam	"You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thank
spam	you with all my heart, and will open all my heart--or nearly so. Have
ham	you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?"
ham	"None. As yet, none."
ham	"Is it the immediate object of this confidence, that you may at once
ham	ascertain that, with my knowledge?"
spam	"Not even so. I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks; I
ham	might (mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow."
ham	"Do you seek any guidance from me?"
spam	"I ask none, sir. But I have thought it possible that you might have it
spam	in your power, if you should deem it right, to give me some."
spam	"Do you seek any promise from me?"
ham	"I do seek that."
ham	"What is it?"
ham	"I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope. I well
ham	understand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her
spam	innocent heart--do not think I have the presumption to assume so much--I
spam	could retain no place in it against her love for her father."
ham	"If that be so, do you see what, on the other hand, is involved in it?"
ham	"I understand equally well, that a word from her father in any suitor's
spam	favour, would outweigh herself and all the world. For which reason,
ham	Doctor Manette," said Darnay, modestly but firmly, "I would not ask that
ham	word, to save my life."
spam	"I am sure of it. Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love, as
spam	well as out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtle and
ham	delicate, and difficult to penetrate. My daughter Lucie is, in this one
ham	respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at the state of her
spam	heart."
spam	"May I ask, sir, if you think she is--" As he hesitated, her father
ham	supplied the rest.
spam	"Is sought by any other suitor?"
ham	"It is what I meant to say."
spam	Her father considered a little before he answered:
spam	"You have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself. Mr. Stryver is here too,
spam	occasionally. If it be at all, it can only be by one of these."
ham	"Or both," said Darnay.
ham	"I had not thought of both; I should not think either, likely. You want
spam	a promise from me. Tell me what it is."
ham	"It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her own
spam	part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you, you will
ham	bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it. I hope you
spam	may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influence against
ham	me. I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I ask. The
spam	condition on which I ask it, and which you have an undoubted right to
spam	require, I will observe immediately."
spam	"I give the promise," said the Doctor, "without any condition. I believe
spam	your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you have stated it. I
ham	believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not to weaken, the ties
ham	between me and my other and far dearer self. If she should ever tell me
spam	that you are essential to her perfect happiness, I will give her to you.
ham	If there were--Charles Darnay, if there were--"
ham	The young man had taken his hand gratefully; their hands were joined as
ham	the Doctor spoke:
ham	"--any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever,
ham	new or old, against the man she really loved--the direct responsibility
ham	thereof not lying on his head--they should all be obliterated for her
spam	sake. She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to me
spam	than wrong, more to me--Well! This is idle talk."
ham	So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so strange
spam	his fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his own
ham	hand turn cold in the hand that slowly released and dropped it.
spam	"You said something to me," said Doctor Manette, breaking into a smile.
spam	"What was it you said to me?"
ham	He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of a
spam	condition. Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:
ham	"Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence on my
spam	part. My present name, though but slightly changed from my mother's, is
spam	not, as you will remember, my own. I wish to tell you what that is, and
ham	why I am in England."
ham	"Stop!" said the Doctor of Beauvais.
spam	"I wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and have no
ham	secret from you."
spam	"Stop!"
spam	For an instant, the Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; for
spam	another instant, even had his two hands laid on Darnay's lips.
ham	"Tell me when I ask you, not now. If your suit should prosper, if Lucie
spam	should love you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning. Do you
ham	promise?"
ham	"Willingly.
ham	"Give me your hand. She will be home directly, and it is better she
ham	should not see us together to-night. Go! God bless you!"
spam	It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later and
spam	darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into the room alone--for
ham	Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs--and was surprised to find his
ham	reading-chair empty.
ham	"My father!" she called to him. "Father dear!"
spam	Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in his
spam	bedroom. Passing lightly across the intermediate room, she looked in at
ham	his door and came running back frightened, crying to herself, with her
spam	blood all chilled, "What shall I do! What shall I do!"
ham	Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at
spam	his door, and softly called to him. The noise ceased at the sound of
spam	her voice, and he presently came out to her, and they walked up and down
ham	together for a long time.
ham	She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night. He
ham	slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old unfinished
ham	work, were all as usual.
ham	XI. A Companion Picture
spam	"Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, on that self-same night, or morning, to his
ham	jackal; "mix another bowl of punch; I have something to say to you."
spam	Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night before,
spam	and the night before that, and a good many nights in succession, making
ham	a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before the setting in
ham	of the long vacation. The clearance was effected at last; the Stryver
ham	arrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was got rid of until
spam	November should come with its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, and
ham	bring grist to the mill again.
spam	Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much
spam	application. It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him
ham	through the night; a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded
ham	the towelling; and he was in a very damaged condition, as he now pulled
spam	his turban off and threw it into the basin in which he had steeped it at
ham	intervals for the last six hours.
ham	"Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?" said Stryver the portly, with
spam	his hands in his waistband, glancing round from the sofa where he lay on
spam	his back.
ham	"I am."
ham	"Now, look here! I am going to tell you something that will rather
ham	surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as
ham	shrewd as you usually do think me. I intend to marry."
ham	"_Do_ you?"
ham	"Yes. And not for money. What do you say now?"
spam	"I don't feel disposed to say much. Who is she?"
spam	"Guess."
ham	"Do I know her?"
spam	"Guess."
spam	"I am not going to guess, at five o'clock in the morning, with my brains
spam	frying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess, you must ask
spam	me to dinner."
spam	"Well then, I'll tell you," said Stryver, coming slowly into a sitting
spam	posture. "Sydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you,
spam	because you are such an insensible dog."
ham	"And you," returned Sydney, busy concocting the punch, "are such a
spam	sensitive and poetical spirit--"
ham	"Come!" rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, "though I don't prefer
spam	any claim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know better), still
spam	I am a tenderer sort of fellow than _you_."
spam	"You are a luckier, if you mean that."
ham	"I don't mean that. I mean I am a man of more--more--"
spam	"Say gallantry, while you are about it," suggested Carton.
ham	"Well! I'll say gallantry. My meaning is that I am a man," said Stryver,
spam	inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch, "who cares more to
spam	be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable, who knows better how
ham	to be agreeable, in a woman's society, than you do."
spam	"Go on," said Sydney Carton.
spam	"No; but before I go on," said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying
spam	way, "I'll have this out with you. You've been at Doctor Manette's house
spam	as much as I have, or more than I have. Why, I have been ashamed of your
ham	moroseness there! Your manners have been of that silent and sullen and
ham	hangdog kind, that, upon my life and soul, I have been ashamed of you,
ham	Sydney!"
ham	"It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar, to
spam	be ashamed of anything," returned Sydney; "you ought to be much obliged
ham	to me."
ham	"You shall not get off in that way," rejoined Stryver, shouldering the
spam	rejoinder at him; "no, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you--and I tell you
spam	to your face to do you good--that you are a devilish ill-conditioned
ham	fellow in that sort of society. You are a disagreeable fellow."
spam	Sydney drank a bumper of the punch he had made, and laughed.
spam	"Look at me!" said Stryver, squaring himself; "I have less need to make
ham	myself agreeable than you have, being more independent in circumstances.
ham	Why do I do it?"
spam	"I never saw you do it yet," muttered Carton.
ham	"I do it because it's politic; I do it on principle. And look at me! I
ham	get on."
ham	"You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"
ham	answered Carton, with a careless air; "I wish you would keep to that. As
spam	to me--will you never understand that I am incorrigible?"
ham	He asked the question with some appearance of scorn.
ham	"You have no business to be incorrigible," was his friend's answer,
ham	delivered in no very soothing tone.
spam	"I have no business to be, at all, that I know of," said Sydney Carton.
spam	"Who is the lady?"
ham	"Now, don't let my announcement of the name make you uncomfortable,
ham	Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatious friendliness
spam	for the disclosure he was about to make, "because I know you don't mean
spam	half you say; and if you meant it all, it would be of no importance. I
ham	make this little preface, because you once mentioned the young lady to
spam	me in slighting terms."
ham	"I did?"
spam	"Certainly; and in these chambers."
spam	Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent friend;
spam	drank his punch and looked at his complacent friend.
ham	"You made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll. The young
ham	lady is Miss Manette. If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness or
ham	delicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been a
spam	little resentful of your employing such a designation; but you are not.
ham	You want that sense altogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when I
ham	think of the expression, than I should be annoyed by a man's opinion of
ham	a picture of mine, who had no eye for pictures: or of a piece of music
spam	of mine, who had no ear for music."
spam	Sydney Carton drank the punch at a great rate; drank it by bumpers,
ham	looking at his friend.
spam	"Now you know all about it, Syd," said Mr. Stryver. "I don't care about
spam	fortune: she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mind to
ham	please myself: on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself. She
ham	will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a rapidly rising man,
ham	and a man of some distinction: it is a piece of good fortune for her,
ham	but she is worthy of good fortune. Are you astonished?"
spam	Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I be
ham	astonished?"
ham	"You approve?"
ham	Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I not approve?"
spam	"Well!" said his friend Stryver, "you take it more easily than I fancied
ham	you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thought you would
spam	be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this time that your
ham	ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will. Yes, Sydney, I have had
ham	enough of this style of life, with no other as a change from it; I
spam	feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a home when he feels
spam	inclined to go to it (when he doesn't, he can stay away), and I feel
ham	that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and will always do me
spam	credit. So I have made up my mind. And now, Sydney, old boy, I want to
spam	say a word to _you_ about _your_ prospects. You are in a bad way, you
spam	know; you really are in a bad way. You don't know the value of money,
spam	you live hard, you'll knock up one of these days, and be ill and poor;
spam	you really ought to think about a nurse."
ham	The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look twice as
spam	big as he was, and four times as offensive.
spam	"Now, let me recommend you," pursued Stryver, "to look it in the face.
ham	I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face,
ham	you, in your different way. Marry. Provide somebody to take care of
ham	you. Never mind your having no enjoyment of women's society, nor
spam	understanding of it, nor tact for it. Find out somebody. Find out some
spam	respectable woman with a little property--somebody in the landlady way,
spam	or lodging-letting way--and marry her, against a rainy day. That's the
spam	kind of thing for _you_. Now think of it, Sydney."
ham	"I'll think of it," said Sydney.
spam	XII. The Fellow of Delicacy
spam	Mr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal of good
ham	fortune on the Doctor's daughter, resolved to make her happiness known
ham	to her before he left town for the Long Vacation. After some mental
spam	debating of the point, he came to the conclusion that it would be as
spam	well to get all the preliminaries done with, and they could then arrange
ham	at their leisure whether he should give her his hand a week or two
spam	before Michaelmas Term, or in the little Christmas vacation between it
spam	and Hilary.
ham	As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but clearly
ham	saw his way to the verdict. Argued with the jury on substantial worldly
ham	grounds--the only grounds ever worth taking into account--it was a
spam	plain case, and had not a weak spot in it. He called himself for the
spam	plaintiff, there was no getting over his evidence, the counsel for
ham	the defendant threw up his brief, and the jury did not even turn to
ham	consider. After trying it, Stryver, C. J., was satisfied that no plainer
ham	case could be.
spam	Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with a formal
spam	proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing, to
spam	Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it behoved him to present
ham	himself in Soho, and there declare his noble mind.
spam	Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the Temple,
ham	while the bloom of the Long Vacation's infancy was still upon it.
spam	Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while he was yet
ham	on Saint Dunstan's side of Temple Bar, bursting in his full-blown way
spam	along the pavement, to the jostlement of all weaker people, might have
spam	seen how safe and strong he was.
ham	His way taking him past Tellson's, and he both banking at Tellson's and
spam	knowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the Manettes, it entered Mr.
ham	Stryver's mind to enter the bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorry the brightness
ham	of the Soho horizon. So, he pushed open the door with the weak rattle
spam	in its throat, stumbled down the two steps, got past the two ancient
ham	cashiers, and shouldered himself into the musty back closet where Mr.
ham	Lorry sat at great books ruled for figures, with perpendicular iron
ham	bars to his window as if that were ruled for figures too, and everything
spam	under the clouds were a sum.
ham	"Halloa!" said Mr. Stryver. "How do you do? I hope you are well!"
ham	It was Stryver's grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for any
ham	place, or space. He was so much too big for Tellson's, that old clerks
spam	in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance, as though he
ham	squeezed them against the wall. The House itself, magnificently reading
ham	the paper quite in the far-off perspective, lowered displeased, as if
spam	the Stryver head had been butted into its responsible waistcoat.
spam	The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of the voice he would
spam	recommend under the circumstances, "How do you do, Mr. Stryver? How do
ham	you do, sir?" and shook hands. There was a peculiarity in his manner
spam	of shaking hands, always to be seen in any clerk at Tellson's who shook
ham	hands with a customer when the House pervaded the air. He shook in a
ham	self-abnegating way, as one who shook for Tellson and Co.
ham	"Can I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver?" asked Mr. Lorry, in his
ham	business character.
spam	"Why, no, thank you; this is a private visit to yourself, Mr. Lorry; I
spam	have come for a private word."
ham	"Oh indeed!" said Mr. Lorry, bending down his ear, while his eye strayed
spam	to the House afar off.
spam	"I am going," said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on the
spam	desk: whereupon, although it was a large double one, there appeared to
spam	be not half desk enough for him: "I am going to make an offer of myself
spam	in marriage to your agreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry."
ham	"Oh dear me!" cried Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin, and looking at his
spam	visitor dubiously.
spam	"Oh dear me, sir?" repeated Stryver, drawing back. "Oh dear you, sir?
spam	What may your meaning be, Mr. Lorry?"
spam	"My meaning," answered the man of business, "is, of course, friendly and
spam	appreciative, and that it does you the greatest credit, and--in short,
spam	my meaning is everything you could desire. But--really, you know, Mr.
ham	Stryver--" Mr. Lorry paused, and shook his head at him in the oddest
ham	manner, as if he were compelled against his will to add, internally,
ham	"you know there really is so much too much of you!"
ham	"Well!" said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand,
spam	opening his eyes wider, and taking a long breath, "if I understand you,
ham	Mr. Lorry, I'll be hanged!"
ham	Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at both ears as a means towards that
ham	end, and bit the feather of a pen.
spam	"D--n it all, sir!" said Stryver, staring at him, "am I not eligible?"
spam	"Oh dear yes! Yes. Oh yes, you're eligible!" said Mr. Lorry. "If you say
ham	eligible, you are eligible."
ham	"Am I not prosperous?" asked Stryver.
ham	"Oh! if you come to prosperous, you are prosperous," said Mr. Lorry.
spam	"And advancing?"
ham	"If you come to advancing you know," said Mr. Lorry, delighted to be
spam	able to make another admission, "nobody can doubt that."
ham	"Then what on earth is your meaning, Mr. Lorry?" demanded Stryver,
ham	perceptibly crestfallen.
ham	"Well! I--Were you going there now?" asked Mr. Lorry.
spam	"Straight!" said Stryver, with a plump of his fist on the desk.
spam	"Then I think I wouldn't, if I was you."
spam	"Why?" said Stryver. "Now, I'll put you in a corner," forensically
ham	shaking a forefinger at him. "You are a man of business and bound to
ham	have a reason. State your reason. Why wouldn't you go?"
spam	"Because," said Mr. Lorry, "I wouldn't go on such an object without
ham	having some cause to believe that I should succeed."
ham	"D--n _me_!" cried Stryver, "but this beats everything."
ham	Mr. Lorry glanced at the distant House, and glanced at the angry
ham	Stryver.
spam	"Here's a man of business--a man of years--a man of experience--_in_
ham	a Bank," said Stryver; "and having summed up three leading reasons for
ham	complete success, he says there's no reason at all! Says it with his
ham	head on!" Mr. Stryver remarked upon the peculiarity as if it would have
ham	been infinitely less remarkable if he had said it with his head off.
ham	"When I speak of success, I speak of success with the young lady; and
spam	when I speak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speak of
ham	causes and reasons that will tell as such with the young lady. The young
ham	lady, my good sir," said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping the Stryver arm, "the
ham	young lady. The young lady goes before all."
spam	"Then you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver, squaring his
spam	elbows, "that it is your deliberate opinion that the young lady at
spam	present in question is a mincing Fool?"
spam	"Not exactly so. I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver," said Mr. Lorry,
spam	reddening, "that I will hear no disrespectful word of that young lady
ham	from any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--whose
spam	taste was so coarse, and whose temper was so overbearing, that he could
ham	not restrain himself from speaking disrespectfully of that young lady at
spam	this desk, not even Tellson's should prevent my giving him a piece of my
ham	mind."
spam	The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryver's
ham	blood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry;
ham	Mr. Lorry's veins, methodical as their courses could usually be, were in
spam	no better state now it was his turn.
ham	"That is what I mean to tell you, sir," said Mr. Lorry. "Pray let there
spam	be no mistake about it."
spam	Mr. Stryver sucked the end of a ruler for a little while, and then stood
spam	hitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gave him the
spam	toothache. He broke the awkward silence by saying:
spam	"This is something new to me, Mr. Lorry. You deliberately advise me not
spam	to go up to Soho and offer myself--_my_self, Stryver of the King's Bench
spam	bar?"
ham	"Do you ask me for my advice, Mr. Stryver?"
ham	"Yes, I do."
ham	"Very good. Then I give it, and you have repeated it correctly."
ham	"And all I can say of it is," laughed Stryver with a vexed laugh, "that
spam	this--ha, ha!--beats everything past, present, and to come."
spam	"Now understand me," pursued Mr. Lorry. "As a man of business, I am
ham	not justified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a man of
spam	business, I know nothing of it. But, as an old fellow, who has carried
ham	Miss Manette in his arms, who is the trusted friend of Miss Manette and
spam	of her father too, and who has a great affection for them both, I have
spam	spoken. The confidence is not of my seeking, recollect. Now, you think I
spam	may not be right?"
spam	"Not I!" said Stryver, whistling. "I can't undertake to find third
ham	parties in common sense; I can only find it for myself. I suppose sense
spam	in certain quarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butter nonsense. It's
ham	new to me, but you are right, I dare say."
spam	"What I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myself--And
ham	understand me, sir," said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again, "I
spam	will not--not even at Tellson's--have it characterised for me by any
ham	gentleman breathing."
ham	"There! I beg your pardon!" said Stryver.
ham	"Granted. Thank you. Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say:--it might be
ham	painful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painful to Doctor
spam	Manette to have the task of being explicit with you, it might be very
ham	painful to Miss Manette to have the task of being explicit with you. You
ham	know the terms upon which I have the honour and happiness to stand with
ham	the family. If you please, committing you in no way, representing you
spam	in no way, I will undertake to correct my advice by the exercise of a
ham	little new observation and judgment expressly brought to bear upon
spam	it. If you should then be dissatisfied with it, you can but test its
ham	soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand, you should be satisfied
spam	with it, and it should be what it now is, it may spare all sides what is
spam	best spared. What do you say?"
ham	"How long would you keep me in town?"
spam	"Oh! It is only a question of a few hours. I could go to Soho in the
ham	evening, and come to your chambers afterwards."
spam	"Then I say yes," said Stryver: "I won't go up there now, I am not so
spam	hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you to look
ham	in to-night. Good morning."
ham	Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of the Bank, causing such a
spam	concussion of air on his passage through, that to stand up against it
spam	bowing behind the two counters, required the utmost remaining strength
ham	of the two ancient clerks. Those venerable and feeble persons were
spam	always seen by the public in the act of bowing, and were popularly
spam	believed, when they had bowed a customer out, still to keep on bowing in
ham	the empty office until they bowed another customer in.
ham	The barrister was keen enough to divine that the banker would not have
ham	gone so far in his expression of opinion on any less solid ground than
spam	moral certainty. Unprepared as he was for the large pill he had to
ham	swallow, he got it down. "And now," said Mr. Stryver, shaking his
spam	forensic forefinger at the Temple in general, when it was down, "my way
spam	out of this, is, to put you all in the wrong."
ham	It was a bit of the art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which he found
spam	great relief. "You shall not put me in the wrong, young lady," said Mr.
spam	Stryver; "I'll do that for you."
ham	Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten o'clock,
ham	Mr. Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out for the
spam	purpose, seemed to have nothing less on his mind than the subject of
ham	the morning. He even showed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, and was
ham	altogether in an absent and preoccupied state.
ham	"Well!" said that good-natured emissary, after a full half-hour of
ham	bootless attempts to bring him round to the question. "I have been to
spam	Soho."
ham	"To Soho?" repeated Mr. Stryver, coldly. "Oh, to be sure! What am I
spam	thinking of!"
spam	"And I have no doubt," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was right in the
ham	conversation we had. My opinion is confirmed, and I reiterate my
ham	advice."
ham	"I assure you," returned Mr. Stryver, in the friendliest way, "that I
spam	am sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor father's
spam	account. I know this must always be a sore subject with the family; let
spam	us say no more about it."
spam	"I don't understand you," said Mr. Lorry.
spam	"I dare say not," rejoined Stryver, nodding his head in a smoothing and
ham	final way; "no matter, no matter."
ham	"But it does matter," Mr. Lorry urged.
ham	"No it doesn't; I assure you it doesn't. Having supposed that there was
spam	sense where there is no sense, and a laudable ambition where there is
ham	not a laudable ambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harm is
ham	done. Young women have committed similar follies often before, and have
ham	repented them in poverty and obscurity often before. In an unselfish
ham	aspect, I am sorry that the thing is dropped, because it would have been
ham	a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view; in a selfish aspect, I am
ham	glad that the thing has dropped, because it would have been a bad thing
spam	for me in a worldly point of view--it is hardly necessary to say I could
spam	have gained nothing by it. There is no harm at all done. I have not
spam	proposed to the young lady, and, between ourselves, I am by no means
ham	certain, on reflection, that I ever should have committed myself to
ham	that extent. Mr. Lorry, you cannot control the mincing vanities and
spam	giddinesses of empty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you
ham	will always be disappointed. Now, pray say no more about it. I tell you,
spam	I regret it on account of others, but I am satisfied on my own account.
ham	And I am really very much obliged to you for allowing me to sound you,
spam	and for giving me your advice; you know the young lady better than I do;
ham	you were right, it never would have done."
ham	Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly at Mr.
ham	Stryver shouldering him towards the door, with an appearance of
spam	showering generosity, forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head.
ham	"Make the best of it, my dear sir," said Stryver; "say no more about it;
ham	thank you again for allowing me to sound you; good night!"
spam	Mr. Lorry was out in the night, before he knew where he was. Mr. Stryver
spam	was lying back on his sofa, winking at his ceiling.
spam	XIII. The Fellow of No Delicacy
ham	If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in the
spam	house of Doctor Manette. He had been there often, during a whole year,
ham	and had always been the same moody and morose lounger there. When he
spam	cared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing,
spam	which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarely
ham	pierced by the light within him.
ham	And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house,
spam	and for the senseless stones that made their pavements. Many a night
ham	he vaguely and unhappily wandered there, when wine had brought no
ham	transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed his solitary
spam	figure lingering there, and still lingering there when the first beams
ham	of the sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties of architecture
ham	in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps the quiet time
spam	brought some sense of better things, else forgotten and unattainable,
ham	into his mind. Of late, the neglected bed in the Temple Court had known
ham	him more scantily than ever; and often when he had thrown himself upon
spam	it no longer than a few minutes, he had got up again, and haunted that
ham	neighbourhood.
spam	On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal
ham	that "he had thought better of that marrying matter") had carried his
spam	delicacy into Devonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers in the
ham	City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst, of health
ham	for the sickliest, and of youth for the oldest, Sydney's feet still trod
spam	those stones. From being irresolute and purposeless, his feet became
spam	animated by an intention, and, in the working out of that intention,
spam	they took him to the Doctor's door.
spam	He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone. She had
ham	never been quite at her ease with him, and received him with some little
spam	embarrassment as he seated himself near her table. But, looking up at
spam	his face in the interchange of the first few common-places, she observed
spam	a change in it.
spam	"I fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!"
spam	"No. But the life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health. What
spam	is to be expected of, or by, such profligates?"
spam	"Is it not--forgive me; I have begun the question on my lips--a pity to
ham	live no better life?"
ham	"God knows it is a shame!"
spam	"Then why not change it?"
ham	Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see that
spam	there were tears in his eyes. There were tears in his voice too, as he
spam	answered:
ham	"It is too late for that. I shall never be better than I am. I shall
spam	sink lower, and be worse."
spam	He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand. The
ham	table trembled in the silence that followed.
ham	She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed. He knew her to
spam	be so, without looking at her, and said:
spam	"Pray forgive me, Miss Manette. I break down before the knowledge of
spam	what I want to say to you. Will you hear me?"
spam	"If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,
ham	it would make me very glad!"
ham	"God bless you for your sweet compassion!"
spam	He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily.
spam	"Don't be afraid to hear me. Don't shrink from anything I say. I am like
ham	one who died young. All my life might have been."
spam	"No, Mr. Carton. I am sure that the best part of it might still be; I am
ham	sure that you might be much, much worthier of yourself."
ham	"Say of you, Miss Manette, and although I know better--although in the
ham	mystery of my own wretched heart I know better--I shall never forget
ham	it!"
spam	She was pale and trembling. He came to her relief with a fixed despair
spam	of himself which made the interview unlike any other that could have
spam	been holden.
ham	"If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned the
ham	love of the man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted, drunken,
ham	poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would have been
ham	conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that he would
spam	bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blight you,
ham	disgrace you, pull you down with him. I know very well that you can have
ham	no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankful that it cannot
spam	be."
spam	"Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton? Can I not recall
ham	you--forgive me again!--to a better course? Can I in no way repay your
ham	confidence? I know this is a confidence," she modestly said, after a
ham	little hesitation, and in earnest tears, "I know you would say this to
ham	no one else. Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?"
spam	He shook his head.
ham	"To none. No, Miss Manette, to none. If you will hear me through a very
spam	little more, all you can ever do for me is done. I wish you to know that
spam	you have been the last dream of my soul. In my degradation I have not
spam	been so degraded but that the sight of you with your father, and of this
ham	home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows that I thought had
spam	died out of me. Since I knew you, I have been troubled by a remorse that
ham	I thought would never reproach me again, and have heard whispers from
ham	old voices impelling me upward, that I thought were silent for ever. I
spam	have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginning anew, shaking off
spam	sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandoned fight. A dream, all
ham	a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves the sleeper where he lay down,
ham	but I wish you to know that you inspired it."
ham	"Will nothing of it remain? O Mr. Carton, think again! Try again!"
spam	"No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quite
spam	undeserving. And yet I have had the weakness, and have still the
ham	weakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me,
spam	heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparable in
spam	its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing, doing no
spam	service, idly burning away."
ham	"Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy
ham	than you were before you knew me--"
ham	"Don't say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me, if
spam	anything could. You will not be the cause of my becoming worse."
spam	"Since the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,
spam	attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean, if I can
ham	make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you? Have I no power for
ham	good, with you, at all?"
spam	"The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come
spam	here to realise. Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life,
ham	the remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all the world;
spam	and that there was something left in me at this time which you could
ham	deplore and pity."
ham	"Which I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently, with
spam	all my heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!"
spam	"Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette. I have proved myself,
ham	and I know better. I distress you; I draw fast to an end. Will you let
spam	me believe, when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my life
spam	was reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies there
spam	alone, and will be shared by no one?"
spam	"If that will be a consolation to you, yes."
spam	"Not even by the dearest one ever to be known to you?"
ham	"Mr. Carton," she answered, after an agitated pause, "the secret is
ham	yours, not mine; and I promise to respect it."
spam	"Thank you. And again, God bless you."
ham	He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards the door.
spam	"Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this
spam	conversation by so much as a passing word. I will never refer to it
ham	again. If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth. In
spam	the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--and
ham	shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was made
ham	to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently carried
spam	in your heart. May it otherwise be light and happy!"
ham	He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was so
spam	sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he every day kept
ham	down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for him as he
ham	stood looking back at her.
ham	"Be comforted!" he said, "I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette. An
ham	hour or two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scorn
ham	but yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than any
ham	wretch who creeps along the streets. Be comforted! But, within myself, I
spam	shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shall be
spam	what you have heretofore seen me. The last supplication but one I make
ham	to you, is, that you will believe this of me."
ham	"I will, Mr. Carton."
ham	"My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve
ham	you of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison, and
ham	between whom and you there is an impassable space. It is useless to say
ham	it, I know, but it rises out of my soul. For you, and for any dear to
spam	you, I would do anything. If my career were of that better kind that
spam	there was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it, I would
spam	embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you. Try to hold
spam	me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere in this one
ham	thing. The time will come, the time will not be long in coming, when new
ham	ties will be formed about you--ties that will bind you yet more tenderly
spam	and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearest ties that will ever
spam	grace and gladden you. O Miss Manette, when the little picture of a
ham	happy father's face looks up in yours, when you see your own bright
spam	beauty springing up anew at your feet, think now and then that there is
spam	a man who would give his life, to keep a life you love beside you!"
ham	He said, "Farewell!" said a last "God bless you!" and left her.
ham	XIV. The Honest Tradesman
ham	To the eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in
ham	Fleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and
ham	variety of objects in movement were every day presented. Who could sit
spam	upon anything in Fleet-street during the busy hours of the day, and
spam	not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one ever tending
spam	westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastward from the sun,
spam	both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of red and purple where
spam	the sun goes down!
spam	With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams,
spam	like the heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on duty
ham	watching one stream--saving that Jerry had no expectation of their ever
ham	running dry. Nor would it have been an expectation of a hopeful kind,
spam	since a small part of his income was derived from the pilotage of timid
spam	women (mostly of a full habit and past the middle term of life) from
ham	Tellson's side of the tides to the opposite shore. Brief as such
ham	companionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher never failed
ham	to become so interested in the lady as to express a strong desire to
spam	have the honour of drinking her very good health. And it was from
ham	the gifts bestowed upon him towards the execution of this benevolent
ham	purpose, that he recruited his finances, as just now observed.
spam	Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and mused in
spam	the sight of men. Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place,
spam	but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him.
ham	It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were
spam	few, and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were so
spam	unprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast that Mrs.
ham	Cruncher must have been "flopping" in some pointed manner, when an
ham	unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted his
spam	attention. Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind of
ham	funeral was coming along, and that there was popular objection to this
spam	funeral, which engendered uproar.
ham	"Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring, "it's a
ham	buryin'."
ham	"Hooroar, father!" cried Young Jerry.
ham	The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious
ham	significance. The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that he watched
ham	his opportunity, and smote the young gentleman on the ear.
ham	"What d'ye mean? What are you hooroaring at? What do you want to conwey
ham	to your own father, you young Rip? This boy is a getting too many for
ham	_me_!" said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him. "Him and his hooroars! Don't
ham	let me hear no more of you, or you shall feel some more of me. D'ye
spam	hear?"
ham	"I warn't doing no harm," Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek.
spam	"Drop it then," said Mr. Cruncher; "I won't have none of _your_ no
spam	harms. Get a top of that there seat, and look at the crowd."
ham	His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissing
ham	round a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coach
spam	there was only one mourner, dressed in the dingy trappings that were
ham	considered essential to the dignity of the position. The position
ham	appeared by no means to please him, however, with an increasing rabble
spam	surrounding the coach, deriding him, making grimaces at him, and
spam	incessantly groaning and calling out: "Yah! Spies! Tst! Yaha! Spies!"
spam	with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat.
ham	Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher; he
ham	always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral passed
spam	Tellson's. Naturally, therefore, a funeral with this uncommon attendance
spam	excited him greatly, and he asked of the first man who ran against him:
ham	"What is it, brother? What's it about?"
spam	"_I_ don't know," said the man. "Spies! Yaha! Tst! Spies!"
spam	He asked another man. "Who is it?"
ham	"_I_ don't know," returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth
ham	nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the
ham	greatest ardour, "Spies! Yaha! Tst, tst! Spi--ies!"
ham	At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case, tumbled
spam	against him, and from this person he learned that the funeral was the
spam	funeral of one Roger Cly.
ham	"Was He a spy?" asked Mr. Cruncher.
spam	"Old Bailey spy," returned his informant. "Yaha! Tst! Yah! Old Bailey
ham	Spi--i--ies!"
spam	"Why, to be sure!" exclaimed Jerry, recalling the Trial at which he had
spam	assisted. "I've seen him. Dead, is he?"
spam	"Dead as mutton," returned the other, "and can't be too dead. Have 'em
ham	out, there! Spies! Pull 'em out, there! Spies!"
ham	The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea,
ham	that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the
spam	suggestion to have 'em out, and to pull 'em out, mobbed the two vehicles
ham	so closely that they came to a stop. On the crowd's opening the coach
ham	doors, the one mourner scuffled out of himself and was in their hands
spam	for a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good use of his time,
ham	that in another moment he was scouring away up a bye-street, after
ham	shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white pocket-handkerchief, and
ham	other symbolical tears.
ham	These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with great
ham	enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops; for a
ham	crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monster much dreaded.
spam	They had already got the length of opening the hearse to take the coffin
spam	out, when some brighter genius proposed instead, its being escorted to
ham	its destination amidst general rejoicing. Practical suggestions being
spam	much needed, this suggestion, too, was received with acclamation, and
ham	the coach was immediately filled with eight inside and a dozen out,
spam	while as many people got on the roof of the hearse as could by any
spam	exercise of ingenuity stick upon it. Among the first of these volunteers
spam	was Jerry Cruncher himself, who modestly concealed his spiky head from
spam	the observation of Tellson's, in the further corner of the mourning
spam	coach.
spam	The officiating undertakers made some protest against these changes in
ham	the ceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near, and several voices
spam	remarking on the efficacy of cold immersion in bringing refractory
spam	members of the profession to reason, the protest was faint and brief.
ham	The remodelled procession started, with a chimney-sweep driving the
ham	hearse--advised by the regular driver, who was perched beside him, under
ham	close inspection, for the purpose--and with a pieman, also attended
ham	by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach. A bear-leader, a
ham	popular street character of the time, was impressed as an additional
spam	ornament, before the cavalcade had gone far down the Strand; and his
spam	bear, who was black and very mangy, gave quite an Undertaking air to
spam	that part of the procession in which he walked.
spam	Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinite
ham	caricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruiting
spam	at every step, and all the shops shutting up before it. Its destination
spam	was the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the fields. It got there
ham	in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground; finally,
ham	accomplished the interment of the deceased Roger Cly in its own way, and
spam	highly to its own satisfaction.
spam	The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of
spam	providing some other entertainment for itself, another brighter
spam	genius (or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casual
ham	passers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them. Chase
spam	was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had never been near
spam	the Old Bailey in their lives, in the realisation of this fancy, and
spam	they were roughly hustled and maltreated. The transition to the sport of
ham	window-breaking, and thence to the plundering of public-houses, was easy
ham	and natural. At last, after several hours, when sundry summer-houses had
spam	been pulled down, and some area-railings had been torn up, to arm
spam	the more belligerent spirits, a rumour got about that the Guards were
ham	coming. Before this rumour, the crowd gradually melted away, and perhaps
spam	the Guards came, and perhaps they never came, and this was the usual
ham	progress of a mob.
spam	Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had remained
spam	behind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers.
ham	The place had a soothing influence on him. He procured a pipe from a
spam	neighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in at the railings and
spam	maturely considering the spot.
spam	"Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way,
spam	"you see that there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes that he
ham	was a young 'un and a straight made 'un."
spam	Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned
ham	himself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on his
ham	station at Tellson's. Whether his meditations on mortality had touched
ham	his liver, or whether his general health had been previously at all
ham	amiss, or whether he desired to show a little attention to an eminent
ham	man, is not so much to the purpose, as that he made a short call upon
ham	his medical adviser--a distinguished surgeon--on his way back.
ham	Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and reported No
spam	job in his absence. The bank closed, the ancient clerks came out, the
spam	usual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea.
spam	"Now, I tell you where it is!" said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on
ham	entering. "If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night, I
spam	shall make sure that you've been praying again me, and I shall work you
spam	for it just the same as if I seen you do it."
spam	The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.
spam	"Why, you're at it afore my face!" said Mr. Cruncher, with signs of
spam	angry apprehension.
spam	"I am saying nothing."
ham	"Well, then; don't meditate nothing. You might as well flop as meditate.
spam	You may as well go again me one way as another. Drop it altogether."
ham	"Yes, Jerry."
spam	"Yes, Jerry," repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea. "Ah! It _is_
spam	yes, Jerry. That's about it. You may say yes, Jerry."
spam	Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky corroborations,
ham	but made use of them, as people not unfrequently do, to express general
spam	ironical dissatisfaction.
ham	"You and your yes, Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of his
spam	bread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisible
spam	oyster out of his saucer. "Ah! I think so. I believe you."
spam	"You are going out to-night?" asked his decent wife, when he took
spam	another bite.
ham	"Yes, I am."
spam	"May I go with you, father?" asked his son, briskly.
ham	"No, you mayn't. I'm a going--as your mother knows--a fishing. That's
spam	where I'm going to. Going a fishing."
spam	"Your fishing-rod gets rayther rusty; don't it, father?"
ham	"Never you mind."
ham	"Shall you bring any fish home, father?"
ham	"If I don't, you'll have short commons, to-morrow," returned that
spam	gentleman, shaking his head; "that's questions enough for you; I ain't a
spam	going out, till you've been long abed."
ham	He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keeping a
spam	most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in
ham	conversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitions
ham	to his disadvantage. With this view, he urged his son to hold her in
ham	conversation also, and led the unfortunate woman a hard life by dwelling
ham	on any causes of complaint he could bring against her, rather than
ham	he would leave her for a moment to her own reflections. The devoutest
ham	person could have rendered no greater homage to the efficacy of an
spam	honest prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife. It was as if a
ham	professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost story.
ham	"And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher. "No games to-morrow! If I, as a
spam	honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two, none
ham	of your not touching of it, and sticking to bread. If I, as a honest
spam	tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of your declaring
spam	on water. When you go to Rome, do as Rome does. Rome will be a ugly
ham	customer to you, if you don't. _I_'m your Rome, you know."
spam	Then he began grumbling again:
spam	"With your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink! I don't
spam	know how scarce you mayn't make the wittles and drink here, by your
ham	flopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct. Look at your boy: he _is_
ham	your'n, ain't he? He's as thin as a lath. Do you call yourself a mother,
ham	and not know that a mother's first duty is to blow her boy out?"
ham	This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother to
spam	perform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, above
spam	all things to lay especial stress on the discharge of that maternal
ham	function so affectingly and delicately indicated by his other parent.
spam	Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerry
ham	was ordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar injunctions,
ham	obeyed them. Mr. Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of the night with
spam	solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion until nearly one
ham	o'clock. Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose up from his chair,
ham	took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, and brought
spam	forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a rope and chain, and other
spam	fishing tackle of that nature. Disposing these articles about him
ham	in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher,
ham	extinguished the light, and went out.
spam	Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to
ham	bed, was not long after his father. Under cover of the darkness he
ham	followed out of the room, followed down the stairs, followed down the
spam	court, followed out into the streets. He was in no uneasiness concerning
spam	his getting into the house again, for it was full of lodgers, and the
ham	door stood ajar all night.
spam	Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of his
spam	father's honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts,
spam	walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held his
spam	honoured parent in view. The honoured parent steering Northward, had not
spam	gone far, when he was joined by another disciple of Izaak Walton, and
ham	the two trudged on together.
spam	Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond the
spam	winking lamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upon a
spam	lonely road. Another fisherman was picked up here--and that so silently,
ham	that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might have supposed the
spam	second follower of the gentle craft to have, all of a sudden, split
spam	himself into two.
ham	The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three stopped
spam	under a bank overhanging the road. Upon the top of the bank was a low
spam	brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing. In the shadow of bank and
ham	wall the three turned out of the road, and up a blind lane, of which
ham	the wall--there, risen to some eight or ten feet high--formed one side.
ham	Crouching down in a corner, peeping up the lane, the next object that
spam	Young Jerry saw, was the form of his honoured parent, pretty well
ham	defined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling an iron gate.
spam	He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, and then the
spam	third. They all dropped softly on the ground within the gate, and lay
spam	there a little--listening perhaps. Then, they moved away on their hands
ham	and knees.
spam	It was now Young Jerry's turn to approach the gate: which he did,
ham	holding his breath. Crouching down again in a corner there, and looking
ham	in, he made out the three fishermen creeping through some rank grass!
spam	and all the gravestones in the churchyard--it was a large churchyard
ham	that they were in--looking on like ghosts in white, while the church
spam	tower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrous giant. They did not
ham	creep far, before they stopped and stood upright. And then they began to
spam	fish.
spam	They fished with a spade, at first. Presently the honoured parent
ham	appeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew.
ham	Whatever tools they worked with, they worked hard, until the awful
spam	striking of the church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made off,
spam	with his hair as stiff as his father's.
ham	But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not
ham	only stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again. They
ham	were still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate for
ham	the second time; but, now they seemed to have got a bite. There was a
spam	screwing and complaining sound down below, and their bent figures were
ham	strained, as if by a weight. By slow degrees the weight broke away the
spam	earth upon it, and came to the surface. Young Jerry very well knew what
spam	it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured parent about to
spam	wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the sight, that he
ham	made off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile or more.
ham	He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary than breath,
ham	it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly desirable
ham	to get to the end of. He had a strong idea that the coffin he had seen
ham	was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on behind him, bolt
ham	upright, upon its narrow end, always on the point of overtaking him
spam	and hopping on at his side--perhaps taking his arm--it was a pursuer to
ham	shun. It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiend too, for, while it
spam	was making the whole night behind him dreadful, he darted out into the
ham	roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of its coming hopping out of them
ham	like a dropsical boy's Kite without tail and wings. It hid in doorways
spam	too, rubbing its horrible shoulders against doors, and drawing them up
spam	to its ears, as if it were laughing. It got into shadows on the road,
ham	and lay cunningly on its back to trip him up. All this time it was
ham	incessantly hopping on behind and gaining on him, so that when the boy
ham	got to his own door he had reason for being half dead. And even then
ham	it would not leave him, but followed him upstairs with a bump on every
ham	stair, scrambled into bed with him, and bumped down, dead and heavy, on
ham	his breast when he fell asleep.
ham	From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened after
spam	daybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father in the
spam	family room. Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so Young Jerry
ham	inferred, from the circumstance of his holding Mrs. Cruncher by the
spam	ears, and knocking the back of her head against the head-board of the
spam	bed.
spam	"I told you I would," said Mr. Cruncher, "and I did."
ham	"Jerry, Jerry, Jerry!" his wife implored.
ham	"You oppose yourself to the profit of the business," said Jerry, "and me
ham	and my partners suffer. You was to honour and obey; why the devil don't
spam	you?"
spam	"I try to be a good wife, Jerry," the poor woman protested, with tears.
spam	"Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband's business? Is it
spam	honouring your husband to dishonour his business? Is it obeying your
spam	husband to disobey him on the wital subject of his business?"
ham	"You hadn't taken to the dreadful business then, Jerry."
spam	"It's enough for you," retorted Mr. Cruncher, "to be the wife of a
ham	honest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations
ham	when he took to his trade or when he didn't. A honouring and obeying
spam	wife would let his trade alone altogether. Call yourself a religious
ham	woman? If you're a religious woman, give me a irreligious one! You have
spam	no more nat'ral sense of duty than the bed of this here Thames river has
ham	of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you."
spam	The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated in
ham	the honest tradesman's kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying down
spam	at his length on the floor. After taking a timid peep at him lying on
spam	his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow, his son lay
spam	down too, and fell asleep again.
ham	There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else. Mr.
spam	Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron pot-lid
ham	by him as a projectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher, in case
ham	he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace. He was brushed
spam	and washed at the usual hour, and set off with his son to pursue his
ham	ostensible calling.
ham	Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his father's side
spam	along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different Young Jerry
ham	from him of the previous night, running home through darkness and
ham	solitude from his grim pursuer. His cunning was fresh with the day,
spam	and his qualms were gone with the night--in which particulars it is not
spam	improbable that he had compeers in Fleet-street and the City of London,
spam	that fine morning.
spam	"Father," said Young Jerry, as they walked along: taking care to keep
spam	at arm's length and to have the stool well between them: "what's a
ham	Resurrection-Man?"
spam	Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on the pavement before he answered, "How
ham	should I know?"
spam	"I thought you knowed everything, father," said the artless boy.
ham	"Hem! Well," returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting off his
spam	hat to give his spikes free play, "he's a tradesman."
spam	"What's his goods, father?" asked the brisk Young Jerry.
spam	"His goods," said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind, "is a
spam	branch of Scientific goods."
ham	"Persons' bodies, ain't it, father?" asked the lively boy.
spam	"I believe it is something of that sort," said Mr. Cruncher.
spam	"Oh, father, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when I'm quite
spam	growed up!"
ham	Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and moral way.
ham	"It depends upon how you dewelop your talents. Be careful to dewelop
ham	your talents, and never to say no more than you can help to nobody, and
spam	there's no telling at the present time what you may not come to be fit
spam	for." As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on a few yards in advance,
spam	to plant the stool in the shadow of the Bar, Mr. Cruncher added to
spam	himself: "Jerry, you honest tradesman, there's hopes wot that boy will
ham	yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense to you for his mother!"
ham	XV. Knitting
ham	There had been earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop of Monsieur
ham	Defarge. As early as six o'clock in the morning, sallow faces peeping
spam	through its barred windows had descried other faces within, bending over
spam	measures of wine. Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wine at the best
spam	of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually thin wine that
ham	he sold at this time. A sour wine, moreover, or a souring, for its
ham	influence on the mood of those who drank it was to make them gloomy. No
ham	vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the pressed grape of Monsieur
ham	Defarge: but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark, lay hidden in
ham	the dregs of it.
ham	This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had been
ham	early drinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge. It had begun
ham	on Monday, and here was Wednesday come. There had been more of early
ham	brooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered and
ham	slunk about there from the time of the opening of the door, who could
spam	not have laid a piece of money on the counter to save their souls. These
ham	were to the full as interested in the place, however, as if they could
ham	have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided from seat to seat,
spam	and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieu of drink, with greedy
ham	looks.
spam	Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the wine-shop
ham	was not visible. He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed the
spam	threshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to see
ham	only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over the distribution of
spam	wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much defaced
ham	and beaten out of their original impress as the small coinage of
spam	humanity from whose ragged pockets they had come.
ham	A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps
spam	observed by the spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked in
ham	at every place, high and low, from the king's palace to the criminal's
ham	gaol. Games at cards languished, players at dominoes musingly built
spam	towers with them, drinkers drew figures on the tables with spilt drops
ham	of wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out the pattern on her sleeve
spam	with her toothpick, and saw and heard something inaudible and invisible
spam	a long way off.
spam	Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday. It was
ham	high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets and under
spam	his swinging lamps: of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge: the other a
spam	mender of roads in a blue cap. All adust and athirst, the two entered
spam	the wine-shop. Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in the breast
spam	of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as they came along, which stirred and
spam	flickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows. Yet, no one had
spam	followed them, and no man spoke when they entered the wine-shop, though
ham	the eyes of every man there were turned upon them.
ham	"Good day, gentlemen!" said Monsieur Defarge.
spam	It may have been a signal for loosening the general tongue. It elicited
spam	an answering chorus of "Good day!"
ham	"It is bad weather, gentlemen," said Defarge, shaking his head.
ham	Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and then all cast down
ham	their eyes and sat silent. Except one man, who got up and went out.
ham	"My wife," said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge: "I have
ham	travelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, called
spam	Jacques. I met him--by accident--a day and half's journey out of Paris.
ham	He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques. Give him to
ham	drink, my wife!"
spam	A second man got up and went out. Madame Defarge set wine before the
ham	mender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the company,
spam	and drank. In the breast of his blouse he carried some coarse dark
spam	bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinking near
ham	Madame Defarge's counter. A third man got up and went out.
ham	Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine--but, he took less
spam	than was given to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it was no
ham	rarity--and stood waiting until the countryman had made his breakfast.
ham	He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at him; not even
ham	Madame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was at work.
ham	"Have you finished your repast, friend?" he asked, in due season.
ham	"Yes, thank you."
spam	"Come, then! You shall see the apartment that I told you you could
ham	occupy. It will suit you to a marvel."
ham	Out of the wine-shop into the street, out of the street into a
ham	courtyard, out of the courtyard up a steep staircase, out of the
spam	staircase into a garret--formerly the garret where a white-haired man
ham	sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.
spam	No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were there who had
spam	gone out of the wine-shop singly. And between them and the white-haired
spam	man afar off, was the one small link, that they had once looked in at
spam	him through the chinks in the wall.
spam	Defarge closed the door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:
ham	"Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three! This is the witness
spam	encountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four. He will tell you all.
spam	Speak, Jacques Five!"
spam	The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead with
spam	it, and said, "Where shall I commence, monsieur?"
ham	"Commence," was Monsieur Defarge's not unreasonable reply, "at the
spam	commencement."
ham	"I saw him then, messieurs," began the mender of roads, "a year ago this
ham	running summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis, hanging by the
spam	chain. Behold the manner of it. I leaving my work on the road, the sun
spam	going to bed, the carriage of the Marquis slowly ascending the hill, he
spam	hanging by the chain--like this."
ham	Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in which
spam	he ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had been
ham	the infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his village
ham	during a whole year.
spam	Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen the man before?
ham	"Never," answered the mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.
ham	Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him then?
spam	"By his tall figure," said the mender of roads, softly, and with his
ham	finger at his nose. "When Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening,
ham	'Say, what is he like?' I make response, 'Tall as a spectre.'"
ham	"You should have said, short as a dwarf," returned Jacques Two.
spam	"But what did I know? The deed was not then accomplished, neither did he
spam	confide in me. Observe! Under those circumstances even, I do not
spam	offer my testimony. Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his finger,
ham	standing near our little fountain, and says, 'To me! Bring that rascal!'
ham	My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing."
ham	"He is right there, Jacques," murmured Defarge, to him who had
ham	interrupted. "Go on!"
ham	"Good!" said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery. "The tall man
spam	is lost, and he is sought--how many months? Nine, ten, eleven?"
spam	"No matter, the number," said Defarge. "He is well hidden, but at last
spam	he is unluckily found. Go on!"
spam	"I am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about to
ham	go to bed. I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down in the
spam	village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes, and see
spam	coming over the hill six soldiers. In the midst of them is a tall man
spam	with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!"
spam	With the aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with his
ham	elbows bound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind him.
ham	"I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiers
ham	and their prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any
ham	spectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as they approach, I
ham	see no more than that they are six soldiers with a tall man bound, and
ham	that they are almost black to my sight--except on the side of the sun
spam	going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs. Also, I see that
spam	their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on the opposite side of the
spam	road, and are on the hill above it, and are like the shadows of giants.
spam	Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that the dust moves
ham	with them as they come, tramp, tramp! But when they advance quite near
ham	to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me. Ah, but he would
spam	be well content to precipitate himself over the hill-side once again, as
ham	on the evening when he and I first encountered, close to the same spot!"
spam	He described it as if he were there, and it was evident that he saw it
ham	vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.
spam	"I do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he does not
spam	show the soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it, with
spam	our eyes. 'Come on!' says the chief of that company, pointing to the
spam	village, 'bring him fast to his tomb!' and they bring him faster. I
spam	follow. His arms are swelled because of being bound so tight, his wooden
spam	shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame. Because he is lame, and
ham	consequently slow, they drive him with their guns--like this!"
ham	He imitated the action of a man's being impelled forward by the
spam	butt-ends of muskets.
ham	"As they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls. They
spam	laugh and pick him up again. His face is bleeding and covered with dust,
ham	but he cannot touch it; thereupon they laugh again. They bring him into
ham	the village; all the village runs to look; they take him past the mill,
spam	and up to the prison; all the village sees the prison gate open in the
ham	darkness of the night, and swallow him--like this!"
spam	He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding
spam	snap of his teeth. Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effect by
spam	opening it again, Defarge said, "Go on, Jacques."
ham	"All the village," pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a low
spam	voice, "withdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain; all the
spam	village sleeps; all the village dreams of that unhappy one, within the
ham	locks and bars of the prison on the crag, and never to come out of it,
spam	except to perish. In the morning, with my tools upon my shoulder, eating
spam	my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuit by the prison, on
ham	my way to my work. There I see him, high up, behind the bars of a lofty
ham	iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night, looking through. He has no
spam	hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call to him; he regards me like a
spam	dead man."
ham	Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another. The looks of all
spam	of them were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened to the
spam	countryman's story; the manner of all of them, while it was secret, was
ham	authoritative too. They had the air of a rough tribunal; Jacques One
ham	and Two sitting on the old pallet-bed, each with his chin resting on
ham	his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender; Jacques Three, equally
spam	intent, on one knee behind them, with his agitated hand always gliding
spam	over the network of fine nerves about his mouth and nose; Defarge
ham	standing between them and the narrator, whom he had stationed in the
spam	light of the window, by turns looking from him to them, and from them to
spam	him.
spam	"Go on, Jacques," said Defarge.
ham	"He remains up there in his iron cage some days. The village looks
spam	at him by stealth, for it is afraid. But it always looks up, from a
spam	distance, at the prison on the crag; and in the evening, when the work
ham	of the day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at the fountain, all
spam	faces are turned towards the prison. Formerly, they were turned towards
ham	the posting-house; now, they are turned towards the prison. They
spam	whisper at the fountain, that although condemned to death he will not be
ham	executed; they say that petitions have been presented in Paris, showing
ham	that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child; they say
ham	that a petition has been presented to the King himself. What do I know?
spam	It is possible. Perhaps yes, perhaps no."
spam	"Listen then, Jacques," Number One of that name sternly interposed.
spam	"Know that a petition was presented to the King and Queen. All here,
spam	yourself excepted, saw the King take it, in his carriage in the street,
spam	sitting beside the Queen. It is Defarge whom you see here, who, at the
spam	hazard of his life, darted out before the horses, with the petition in
spam	his hand."
spam	"And once again listen, Jacques!" said the kneeling Number Three:
spam	his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a
spam	strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that was neither
spam	food nor drink; "the guard, horse and foot, surrounded the petitioner,
spam	and struck him blows. You hear?"
spam	"I hear, messieurs."
spam	"Go on then," said Defarge.
ham	"Again; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain," resumed the
spam	countryman, "that he is brought down into our country to be executed on
spam	the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed. They even whisper
ham	that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneur was the
ham	father of his tenants--serfs--what you will--he will be executed as a
spam	parricide. One old man says at the fountain, that his right hand, armed
ham	with the knife, will be burnt off before his face; that, into wounds
ham	which will be made in his arms, his breast, and his legs, there will be
ham	poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin, wax, and sulphur; finally,
ham	that he will be torn limb from limb by four strong horses. That old man
ham	says, all this was actually done to a prisoner who made an attempt on
ham	the life of the late King, Louis Fifteen. But how do I know if he lies?
spam	I am not a scholar."
ham	"Listen once again then, Jacques!" said the man with the restless hand
ham	and the craving air. "The name of that prisoner was Damiens, and it was
spam	all done in open day, in the open streets of this city of Paris; and
spam	nothing was more noticed in the vast concourse that saw it done, than
ham	the crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were full of eager
spam	attention to the last--to the last, Jacques, prolonged until nightfall,
spam	when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still breathed! And it was
spam	done--why, how old are you?"
spam	"Thirty-five," said the mender of roads, who looked sixty.
spam	"It was done when you were more than ten years old; you might have seen
ham	it."
spam	"Enough!" said Defarge, with grim impatience. "Long live the Devil! Go
ham	on."
ham	"Well! Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing else;
spam	even the fountain appears to fall to that tune. At length, on Sunday
ham	night when all the village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down from
spam	the prison, and their guns ring on the stones of the little street.
spam	Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing; in the morning, by
ham	the fountain, there is raised a gallows forty feet high, poisoning the
spam	water."
spam	The mender of roads looked _through_ rather than _at_ the low ceiling,
spam	and pointed as if he saw the gallows somewhere in the sky.
spam	"All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out,
spam	the cows are there with the rest. At midday, the roll of drums. Soldiers
spam	have marched into the prison in the night, and he is in the midst
ham	of many soldiers. He is bound as before, and in his mouth there is
ham	a gag--tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as if he
ham	laughed." He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two thumbs,
ham	from the corners of his mouth to his ears. "On the top of the gallows is
spam	fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the air. He is hanged
ham	there forty feet high--and is left hanging, poisoning the water."
spam	They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face,
ham	on which the perspiration had started afresh while he recalled the
spam	spectacle.
ham	"It is frightful, messieurs. How can the women and the children draw
spam	water! Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow! Under it, have
ham	I said? When I left the village, Monday evening as the sun was going to
ham	bed, and looked back from the hill, the shadow struck across the church,
ham	across the mill, across the prison--seemed to strike across the earth,
ham	messieurs, to where the sky rests upon it!"
ham	The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at the other
spam	three, and his finger quivered with the craving that was on him.
spam	"That's all, messieurs. I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do),
ham	and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I was
ham	warned I should) this comrade. With him, I came on, now riding and now
spam	walking, through the rest of yesterday and through last night. And here
spam	you see me!"
spam	After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, "Good! You have acted
ham	and recounted faithfully. Will you wait for us a little, outside the
ham	door?"
spam	"Very willingly," said the mender of roads. Whom Defarge escorted to the
ham	top of the stairs, and, leaving seated there, returned.
ham	The three had risen, and their heads were together when he came back to
ham	the garret.
spam	"How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One. "To be registered?"
ham	"To be registered, as doomed to destruction," returned Defarge.
spam	"Magnificent!" croaked the man with the craving.
ham	"The chateau, and all the race?" inquired the first.
ham	"The chateau and all the race," returned Defarge. "Extermination."
ham	The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and began
ham	gnawing another finger.
ham	"Are you sure," asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, "that no embarrassment
spam	can arise from our manner of keeping the register? Without doubt it is
ham	safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall we always
spam	be able to decipher it--or, I ought to say, will she?"
ham	"Jacques," returned Defarge, drawing himself up, "if madame my wife
ham	undertook to keep the register in her memory alone, she would not lose
ham	a word of it--not a syllable of it. Knitted, in her own stitches and her
ham	own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as the sun. Confide in
ham	Madame Defarge. It would be easier for the weakest poltroon that lives,
ham	to erase himself from existence, than to erase one letter of his name or
spam	crimes from the knitted register of Madame Defarge."
ham	There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man who
ham	hungered, asked: "Is this rustic to be sent back soon? I hope so. He is
spam	very simple; is he not a little dangerous?"
ham	"He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than would
spam	easily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height. I charge myself
ham	with him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him
spam	on his road. He wishes to see the fine world--the King, the Queen, and
ham	Court; let him see them on Sunday."
spam	"What?" exclaimed the hungry man, staring. "Is it a good sign, that he
spam	wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?"
spam	"Jacques," said Defarge; "judiciously show a cat milk, if you wish her
spam	to thirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if you wish
spam	him to bring it down one day."
ham	Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found already
spam	dozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on the
ham	pallet-bed and take some rest. He needed no persuasion, and was soon
ham	asleep.
ham	Worse quarters than Defarge's wine-shop, could easily have been found
ham	in Paris for a provincial slave of that degree. Saving for a mysterious
spam	dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very
spam	new and agreeable. But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly
spam	unconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive that
spam	his being there had any connection with anything below the surface, that
spam	he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her. For, he
ham	contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee what that lady
spam	might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she should take it
spam	into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seen him do a
ham	murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infallibly go through
ham	with it until the play was played out.
spam	Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted
ham	(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur
spam	and himself to Versailles. It was additionally disconcerting to have
spam	madame knitting all the way there, in a public conveyance; it was
spam	additionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in the crowd in the
spam	afternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited to
spam	see the carriage of the King and Queen.
ham	"You work hard, madame," said a man near her.
spam	"Yes," answered Madame Defarge; "I have a good deal to do."
spam	"What do you make, madame?"
spam	"Many things."
ham	"For instance--"
spam	"For instance," returned Madame Defarge, composedly, "shrouds."
ham	The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the mender
spam	of roads fanned himself with his blue cap: feeling it mightily close
spam	and oppressive. If he needed a King and Queen to restore him, he was
ham	fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-faced King
spam	and the fair-faced Queen came in their golden coach, attended by the
spam	shining Bull's Eye of their Court, a glittering multitude of laughing
spam	ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder and splendour
spam	and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful faces of both
spam	sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much to his temporary
ham	intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live the Queen,
spam	Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never heard of
ham	ubiquitous Jacques in his time. Then, there were gardens, courtyards,
spam	terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen, more Bull's Eye,
ham	more lords and ladies, more Long live they all! until he absolutely wept
spam	with sentiment. During the whole of this scene, which lasted some three
spam	hours, he had plenty of shouting and weeping and sentimental company,
spam	and throughout Defarge held him by the collar, as if to restrain him
spam	from flying at the objects of his brief devotion and tearing them to
spam	pieces.
spam	"Bravo!" said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over, like a
ham	patron; "you are a good boy!"
ham	The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful of
ham	having made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.
spam	"You are the fellow we want," said Defarge, in his ear; "you make
spam	these fools believe that it will last for ever. Then, they are the more
spam	insolent, and it is the nearer ended."
spam	"Hey!" cried the mender of roads, reflectively; "that's true."
spam	"These fools know nothing. While they despise your breath, and would
spam	stop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than
spam	in one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breath
ham	tells them. Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannot
spam	deceive them too much."
spam	Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded in
spam	confirmation.
spam	"As to you," said she, "you would shout and shed tears for anything, if
ham	it made a show and a noise. Say! Would you not?"
ham	"Truly, madame, I think so. For the moment."
spam	"If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them to
ham	pluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you would
spam	pick out the richest and gayest. Say! Would you not?"
ham	"Truly yes, madame."
ham	"Yes. And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were
spam	set upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage,
spam	you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers; would you not?"
ham	"It is true, madame."
ham	"You have seen both dolls and birds to-day," said Madame Defarge, with
spam	a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been apparent;
spam	"now, go home!"
ham	XVI. Still Knitting
spam	Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the
ham	bosom of Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through the
spam	darkness, and through the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue by
ham	the wayside, slowly tending towards that point of the compass where
spam	the chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, now in his grave, listened to
ham	the whispering trees. Such ample leisure had the stone faces, now,
spam	for listening to the trees and to the fountain, that the few village
spam	scarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments of dead
spam	stick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone courtyard and
ham	terrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved fancy that
spam	the expression of the faces was altered. A rumour just lived in the
ham	village--had a faint and bare existence there, as its people had--that
ham	when the knife struck home, the faces changed, from faces of pride to
ham	faces of anger and pain; also, that when that dangling figure was hauled
spam	up forty feet above the fountain, they changed again, and bore a cruel
spam	look of being avenged, which they would henceforth bear for ever. In the
ham	stone face over the great window of the bed-chamber where the murder
spam	was done, two fine dints were pointed out in the sculptured nose, which
ham	everybody recognised, and which nobody had seen of old; and on the
spam	scarce occasions when two or three ragged peasants emerged from the
ham	crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieur the Marquis petrified, a
ham	skinny finger would not have pointed to it for a minute, before they all
spam	started away among the moss and leaves, like the more fortunate hares
spam	who could find a living there.
ham	Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on the
ham	stone floor, and the pure water in the village well--thousands of acres
ham	of land--a whole province of France--all France itself--lay under the
ham	night sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line. So does a whole
ham	world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie in a twinkling
spam	star. And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of light and analyse
ham	the manner of its composition, so, sublimer intelligences may read in
ham	the feeble shining of this earth of ours, every thought and act, every
ham	vice and virtue, of every responsible creature on it.
ham	The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the starlight,
spam	in their public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto their
spam	journey naturally tended. There was the usual stoppage at the barrier
ham	guardhouse, and the usual lanterns came glancing forth for the usual
spam	examination and inquiry. Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing one or two
ham	of the soldiery there, and one of the police. The latter he was intimate
ham	with, and affectionately embraced.
ham	When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky wings,
ham	and they, having finally alighted near the Saint's boundaries, were
spam	picking their way on foot through the black mud and offal of his
spam	streets, Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:
ham	"Say then, my friend; what did Jacques of the police tell thee?"
ham	"Very little to-night, but all he knows. There is another spy
spam	commissioned for our quarter. There may be many more, for all that he
spam	can say, but he knows of one."
spam	"Eh well!" said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a cool
ham	business air. "It is necessary to register him. How do they call that
ham	man?"
spam	"He is English."
ham	"So much the better. His name?"
spam	"Barsad," said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation. But, he had
ham	been so careful to get it accurately, that he then spelt it with perfect
ham	correctness.
spam	"Barsad," repeated madame. "Good. Christian name?"
spam	"John."
spam	"John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself.
spam	"Good. His appearance; is it known?"
spam	"Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair;
spam	complexion dark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face
spam	thin, long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a
ham	peculiar inclination towards the left cheek; expression, therefore,
ham	sinister."
ham	"Eh my faith. It is a portrait!" said madame, laughing. "He shall be
ham	registered to-morrow."
spam	They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight),
spam	and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk, counted
spam	the small moneys that had been taken during her absence, examined the
ham	stock, went through the entries in the book, made other entries of
ham	her own, checked the serving man in every possible way, and finally
ham	dismissed him to bed. Then she turned out the contents of the bowl
ham	of money for the second time, and began knotting them up in her
ham	handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keeping through the
spam	night. All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth, walked
ham	up and down, complacently admiring, but never interfering; in which
spam	condition, indeed, as to the business and his domestic affairs, he
spam	walked up and down through life.
ham	The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so foul a
spam	neighbourhood, was ill-smelling. Monsieur Defarge's olfactory sense was
spam	by no means delicate, but the stock of wine smelt much stronger than
spam	it ever tasted, and so did the stock of rum and brandy and aniseed. He
spam	whiffed the compound of scents away, as he put down his smoked-out pipe.
spam	"You are fatigued," said madame, raising her glance as she knotted the
ham	money. "There are only the usual odours."
ham	"I am a little tired," her husband acknowledged.
ham	"You are a little depressed, too," said madame, whose quick eyes had
ham	never been so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or two for
spam	him. "Oh, the men, the men!"
ham	"But my dear!" began Defarge.
ham	"But my dear!" repeated madame, nodding firmly; "but my dear! You are
spam	faint of heart to-night, my dear!"
ham	"Well, then," said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his
spam	breast, "it _is_ a long time."
spam	"It is a long time," repeated his wife; "and when is it not a long time?
ham	Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is the rule."
spam	"It does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning," said
spam	Defarge.
spam	"How long," demanded madame, composedly, "does it take to make and store
spam	the lightning? Tell me."
ham	Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if there were something in that
ham	too.
ham	"It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to
spam	swallow a town. Eh well! Tell me how long it takes to prepare the
ham	earthquake?"
ham	"A long time, I suppose," said Defarge.
ham	"But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everything
spam	before it. In the meantime, it is always preparing, though it is not
spam	seen or heard. That is your consolation. Keep it."
ham	She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.
ham	"I tell thee," said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis,
spam	"that although it is a long time on the road, it is on the road and
spam	coming. I tell thee it never retreats, and never stops. I tell thee it
ham	is always advancing. Look around and consider the lives of all the world
ham	that we know, consider the faces of all the world that we know, consider
spam	the rage and discontent to which the Jacquerie addresses itself with
ham	more and more of certainty every hour. Can such things last? Bah! I mock
spam	you."
spam	"My brave wife," returned Defarge, standing before her with his head
ham	a little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and
spam	attentive pupil before his catechist, "I do not question all this. But
spam	it has lasted a long time, and it is possible--you know well, my wife,
ham	it is possible--that it may not come, during our lives."
ham	"Eh well! How then?" demanded madame, tying another knot, as if there
spam	were another enemy strangled.
ham	"Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug.
ham	"We shall not see the triumph."
spam	"We shall have helped it," returned madame, with her extended hand in
spam	strong action. "Nothing that we do, is done in vain. I believe, with all
spam	my soul, that we shall see the triumph. But even if not, even if I knew
ham	certainly not, show me the neck of an aristocrat and tyrant, and still I
spam	would--"
ham	Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed.
spam	"Hold!" cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged with
ham	cowardice; "I too, my dear, will stop at nothing."
spam	"Yes! But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your victim
spam	and your opportunity, to sustain you. Sustain yourself without that.
ham	When the time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but wait for the
ham	time with the tiger and the devil chained--not shown--yet always ready."
spam	Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by striking her
spam	little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains
ham	out, and then gathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in a serene
ham	manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.
ham	Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in the
ham	wine-shop, knitting away assiduously. A rose lay beside her, and if she
spam	now and then glanced at the flower, it was with no infraction of her
spam	usual preoccupied air. There were a few customers, drinking or not
spam	drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about. The day was very hot,
ham	and heaps of flies, who were extending their inquisitive and adventurous
spam	perquisitions into all the glutinous little glasses near madame, fell
ham	dead at the bottom. Their decease made no impression on the other flies
ham	out promenading, who looked at them in the coolest manner (as if they
ham	themselves were elephants, or something as far removed), until they met
spam	the same fate. Curious to consider how heedless flies are!--perhaps they
spam	thought as much at Court that sunny summer day.
ham	A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which she
ham	felt to be a new one. She laid down her knitting, and began to pin her
spam	rose in her head-dress, before she looked at the figure.
spam	It was curious. The moment Madame Defarge took up the rose, the
ham	customers ceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of the
ham	wine-shop.
ham	"Good day, madame," said the new-comer.
ham	"Good day, monsieur."
ham	She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting:
ham	"Hah! Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black
spam	hair, generally rather handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark,
ham	thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight, having a
ham	peculiar inclination towards the left cheek which imparts a sinister
spam	expression! Good day, one and all!"
spam	"Have the goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and a
spam	mouthful of cool fresh water, madame."
ham	Madame complied with a polite air.
spam	"Marvellous cognac this, madame!"
spam	It was the first time it had ever been so complimented, and Madame
ham	Defarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better. She said,
ham	however, that the cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting. The
spam	visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took the opportunity
ham	of observing the place in general.
ham	"You knit with great skill, madame."
spam	"I am accustomed to it."
spam	"A pretty pattern too!"
ham	"_You_ think so?" said madame, looking at him with a smile.
spam	"Decidedly. May one ask what it is for?"
spam	"Pastime," said madame, still looking at him with a smile while her
ham	fingers moved nimbly.
ham	"Not for use?"
spam	"That depends. I may find a use for it one day. If I do--Well," said
ham	madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kind of
ham	coquetry, "I'll use it!"
spam	It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be
spam	decidedly opposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge. Two
spam	men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,
spam	catching sight of that novelty, they faltered, made a pretence of
ham	looking about as if for some friend who was not there, and went away.
spam	Nor, of those who had been there when this visitor entered, was there
spam	one left. They had all dropped off. The spy had kept his eyes open,
ham	but had been able to detect no sign. They had lounged away in a
ham	poverty-stricken, purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural and
spam	unimpeachable.
spam	"_John_," thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted,
ham	and her eyes looked at the stranger. "Stay long enough, and I shall knit
spam	'BARSAD' before you go."
ham	"You have a husband, madame?"
ham	"I have."
spam	"Children?"
ham	"No children."
ham	"Business seems bad?"
spam	"Business is very bad; the people are so poor."
spam	"Ah, the unfortunate, miserable people! So oppressed, too--as you say."
ham	"As _you_ say," madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knitting an
ham	extra something into his name that boded him no good.
spam	"Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so.
ham	Of course."
spam	"_I_ think?" returned madame, in a high voice. "I and my husband have
ham	enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking. All we
ham	think, here, is how to live. That is the subject _we_ think of, and
ham	it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, without
spam	embarrassing our heads concerning others. _I_ think for others? No, no."
spam	The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, did
ham	not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but,
ham	stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on Madame
ham	Defarge's little counter, and occasionally sipping his cognac.
spam	"A bad business this, madame, of Gaspard's execution. Ah! the poor
ham	Gaspard!" With a sigh of great compassion.
ham	"My faith!" returned madame, coolly and lightly, "if people use knives
ham	for such purposes, they have to pay for it. He knew beforehand what the
spam	price of his luxury was; he has paid the price."
spam	"I believe," said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone
ham	that invited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary
spam	susceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face: "I believe there
ham	is much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching the poor
spam	fellow? Between ourselves."
ham	"Is there?" asked madame, vacantly.
ham	"Is there not?"
spam	"--Here is my husband!" said Madame Defarge.
spam	As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy saluted
ham	him by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, "Good day,
spam	Jacques!" Defarge stopped short, and stared at him.
ham	"Good day, Jacques!" the spy repeated; with not quite so much
spam	confidence, or quite so easy a smile under the stare.
spam	"You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned the keeper of the wine-shop.
spam	"You mistake me for another. That is not my name. I am Ernest Defarge."
ham	"It is all the same," said the spy, airily, but discomfited too: "good
ham	day!"
ham	"Good day!" answered Defarge, drily.
spam	"I was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting when
spam	you entered, that they tell me there is--and no wonder!--much sympathy
ham	and anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard."
ham	"No one has told me so," said Defarge, shaking his head. "I know nothing
ham	of it."
ham	Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood with his
ham	hand on the back of his wife's chair, looking over that barrier at the
spam	person to whom they were both opposed, and whom either of them would
spam	have shot with the greatest satisfaction.
ham	The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious
ham	attitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of fresh
spam	water, and asked for another glass of cognac. Madame Defarge poured it
spam	out for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little song over
ham	it.
spam	"You seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I do?"
ham	observed Defarge.
spam	"Not at all, but I hope to know it better. I am so profoundly interested
spam	in its miserable inhabitants."
ham	"Hah!" muttered Defarge.
spam	"The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,"
spam	pursued the spy, "that I have the honour of cherishing some interesting
spam	associations with your name."
spam	"Indeed!" said Defarge, with much indifference.
ham	"Yes, indeed. When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic,
ham	had the charge of him, I know. He was delivered to you. You see I am
spam	informed of the circumstances?"
spam	"Such is the fact, certainly," said Defarge. He had had it conveyed
spam	to him, in an accidental touch of his wife's elbow as she knitted and
ham	warbled, that he would do best to answer, but always with brevity.
spam	"It was to you," said the spy, "that his daughter came; and it was
spam	from your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown
ham	monsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of the bank of
spam	Tellson and Company--over to England."
ham	"Such is the fact," repeated Defarge.
ham	"Very interesting remembrances!" said the spy. "I have known Doctor
spam	Manette and his daughter, in England."
spam	"Yes?" said Defarge.
ham	"You don't hear much about them now?" said the spy.
spam	"No," said Defarge.
ham	"In effect," madame struck in, looking up from her work and her little
ham	song, "we never hear about them. We received the news of their safe
ham	arrival, and perhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but, since then,
spam	they have gradually taken their road in life--we, ours--and we have held
ham	no correspondence."
ham	"Perfectly so, madame," replied the spy. "She is going to be married."
ham	"Going?" echoed madame. "She was pretty enough to have been married long
ham	ago. You English are cold, it seems to me."
ham	"Oh! You know I am English."
spam	"I perceive your tongue is," returned madame; "and what the tongue is, I
spam	suppose the man is."
ham	He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made the best
ham	of it, and turned it off with a laugh. After sipping his cognac to the
ham	end, he added:
spam	"Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married. But not to an Englishman; to
spam	one who, like herself, is French by birth. And speaking of Gaspard (ah,
ham	poor Gaspard! It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing that she is
ham	going to marry the nephew of Monsieur the Marquis, for whom Gaspard
spam	was exalted to that height of so many feet; in other words, the present
spam	Marquis. But he lives unknown in England, he is no Marquis there; he is
spam	Mr. Charles Darnay. D'Aulnais is the name of his mother's family."
spam	Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpable
ham	effect upon her husband. Do what he would, behind the little counter,
spam	as to the striking of a light and the lighting of his pipe, he was
spam	troubled, and his hand was not trustworthy. The spy would have been no
ham	spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his mind.
ham	Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be
spam	worth, and no customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad
spam	paid for what he had drunk, and took his leave: taking occasion to say,
spam	in a genteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward to the
spam	pleasure of seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again. For some minutes
ham	after he had emerged into the outer presence of Saint Antoine, the
ham	husband and wife remained exactly as he had left them, lest he should
ham	come back.
ham	"Can it be true," said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at his wife
ham	as he stood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair: "what he has
ham	said of Ma'amselle Manette?"
ham	"As he has said it," returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little, "it
spam	is probably false. But it may be true."
ham	"If it is--" Defarge began, and stopped.
spam	"If it is?" repeated his wife.
spam	"--And if it does come, while we live to see it triumph--I hope, for her
ham	sake, Destiny will keep her husband out of France."
ham	"Her husband's destiny," said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure,
spam	"will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to the end that is
spam	to end him. That is all I know."
ham	"But it is very strange--now, at least, is it not very strange"--said
ham	Defarge, rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it,
spam	"that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself, her
ham	husband's name should be proscribed under your hand at this moment, by
spam	the side of that infernal dog's who has just left us?"
ham	"Stranger things than that will happen when it does come," answered
spam	madame. "I have them both here, of a certainty; and they are both here
ham	for their merits; that is enough."
spam	She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presently
ham	took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about her head.
spam	Either Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that the objectionable
spam	decoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on the watch for its
ham	disappearance; howbeit, the Saint took courage to lounge in, very
spam	shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.
spam	In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turned
ham	himself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and came
spam	to the corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air, Madame
ham	Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass from place
ham	to place and from group to group: a Missionary--there were many like
ham	her--such as the world will do well never to breed again. All the women
ham	knitted. They knitted worthless things; but, the mechanical work was a
spam	mechanical substitute for eating and drinking; the hands moved for the
ham	jaws and the digestive apparatus: if the bony fingers had been still,
spam	the stomachs would have been more famine-pinched.
spam	But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts. And as Madame
ham	Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker and fiercer
spam	among every little knot of women that she had spoken with, and left
ham	behind.
ham	Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration. "A
ham	great woman," said he, "a strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfully
ham	grand woman!"
ham	Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells and
ham	the distant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard, as
ham	the women sat knitting, knitting. Darkness encompassed them. Another
spam	darkness was closing in as surely, when the church bells, then ringing
spam	pleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be melted into
ham	thundering cannon; when the military drums should be beating to drown a
ham	wretched voice, that night all potent as the voice of Power and Plenty,
spam	Freedom and Life. So much was closing in about the women who sat
spam	knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closing in around
ham	a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit knitting, knitting,
ham	counting dropping heads.
ham	XVII. One Night
ham	Never did the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet corner in
spam	Soho, than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his daughter sat
spam	under the plane-tree together. Never did the moon rise with a milder
ham	radiance over great London, than on that night when it found them still
spam	seated under the tree, and shone upon their faces through its leaves.
ham	Lucie was to be married to-morrow. She had reserved this last evening
spam	for her father, and they sat alone under the plane-tree.
ham	"You are happy, my dear father?"
ham	"Quite, my child."
ham	They had said little, though they had been there a long time. When it
spam	was yet light enough to work and read, she had neither engaged herself
spam	in her usual work, nor had she read to him. She had employed herself in
ham	both ways, at his side under the tree, many and many a time; but, this
ham	time was not quite like any other, and nothing could make it so.
spam	"And I am very happy to-night, dear father. I am deeply happy in the
ham	love that Heaven has so blessed--my love for Charles, and Charles's love
spam	for me. But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to you, or
ham	if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even by
spam	the length of a few of these streets, I should be more unhappy and
spam	self-reproachful now than I can tell you. Even as it is--"
spam	Even as it was, she could not command her voice.
ham	In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her face
ham	upon his breast. In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light of
spam	the sun itself is--as the light called human life is--at its coming and
ham	its going.
ham	"Dearest dear! Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite,
ham	quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine, will
ham	ever interpose between us? _I_ know it well, but do you know it? In your
ham	own heart, do you feel quite certain?"
ham	Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could
spam	scarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling! More than that," he
spam	added, as he tenderly kissed her: "my future is far brighter, Lucie,
spam	seen through your marriage, than it could have been--nay, than it ever
spam	was--without it."
spam	"If I could hope _that_, my father!--"
ham	"Believe it, love! Indeed it is so. Consider how natural and how plain
spam	it is, my dear, that it should be so. You, devoted and young, cannot
ham	fully appreciate the anxiety I have felt that your life should not be
ham	wasted--"
ham	She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his, and repeated
spam	the word.
spam	"--wasted, my child--should not be wasted, struck aside from the
spam	natural order of things--for my sake. Your unselfishness cannot entirely
spam	comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only ask yourself,
ham	how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was incomplete?"
spam	"If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quite happy
spam	with you."
ham	He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappy
ham	without Charles, having seen him; and replied:
spam	"My child, you did see him, and it is Charles. If it had not been
ham	Charles, it would have been another. Or, if it had been no other, I
ham	should have been the cause, and then the dark part of my life would have
spam	cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you."
spam	It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing him
spam	refer to the period of his suffering. It gave her a strange and new
ham	sensation while his words were in her ears; and she remembered it long
ham	afterwards.
spam	"See!" said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the moon.
ham	"I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bear her
spam	light. I have looked at her when it has been such torture to me to think
spam	of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten my head against
ham	my prison-walls. I have looked at her, in a state so dull and lethargic,
ham	that I have thought of nothing but the number of horizontal lines I
ham	could draw across her at the full, and the number of perpendicular lines
ham	with which I could intersect them." He added in his inward and pondering
spam	manner, as he looked at the moon, "It was twenty either way, I remember,
ham	and the twentieth was difficult to squeeze in."
ham	The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time,
spam	deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her in
ham	the manner of his reference. He only seemed to contrast his present
spam	cheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over.
spam	"I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the unborn
spam	child from whom I had been rent. Whether it was alive. Whether it had
ham	been born alive, or the poor mother's shock had killed it. Whether it
ham	was a son who would some day avenge his father. (There was a time in my
ham	imprisonment, when my desire for vengeance was unbearable.) Whether it
spam	was a son who would never know his father's story; who might even live
ham	to weigh the possibility of his father's having disappeared of his own
spam	will and act. Whether it was a daughter who would grow to be a woman."
spam	She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand.
spam	"I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of
spam	me--rather, altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me. I have
ham	cast up the years of her age, year after year. I have seen her married
spam	to a man who knew nothing of my fate. I have altogether perished from
ham	the remembrance of the living, and in the next generation my place was a
spam	blank."
ham	"My father! Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter who
ham	never existed, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child."
spam	"You, Lucie? It is out of the Consolation and restoration you have
spam	brought to me, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us and
ham	the moon on this last night.--What did I say just now?"
spam	"She knew nothing of you. She cared nothing for you."
spam	"So! But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silence
spam	have touched me in a different way--have affected me with something as
ham	like a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for its
ham	foundations could--I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, and
ham	leading me out into the freedom beyond the fortress. I have seen her
spam	image in the moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I never held
spam	her in my arms; it stood between the little grated window and the door.
spam	But, you understand that that was not the child I am speaking of?"
spam	"The figure was not; the--the--image; the fancy?"
ham	"No. That was another thing. It stood before my disturbed sense of
spam	sight, but it never moved. The phantom that my mind pursued, was another
spam	and more real child. Of her outward appearance I know no more than
spam	that she was like her mother. The other had that likeness too--as you
spam	have--but was not the same. Can you follow me, Lucie? Hardly, I think?
spam	I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner to understand these
spam	perplexed distinctions."
spam	His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from running
ham	cold, as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition.
ham	"In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight,
spam	coming to me and taking me out to show me that the home of her married
ham	life was full of her loving remembrance of her lost father. My picture
spam	was in her room, and I was in her prayers. Her life was active,
spam	cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all."
ham	"I was that child, my father, I was not half so good, but in my love
spam	that was I."
ham	"And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais, "and
spam	they had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me. When they passed
spam	a prison of the State, they kept far from its frowning walls, and looked
ham	up at its bars, and spoke in whispers. She could never deliver me; I
spam	imagined that she always brought me back after showing me such things.
ham	But then, blessed with the relief of tears, I fell upon my knees, and
spam	blessed her."
ham	"I am that child, I hope, my father. O my dear, my dear, will you bless
spam	me as fervently to-morrow?"
ham	"Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have to-night
ham	for loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for my great
spam	happiness. My thoughts, when they were wildest, never rose near the
ham	happiness that I have known with you, and that we have before us."
spam	He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly thanked
ham	Heaven for having bestowed her on him. By-and-bye, they went into the
spam	house.
ham	There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was even to
spam	be no bridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross. The marriage was to make no
ham	change in their place of residence; they had been able to extend it,
spam	by taking to themselves the upper rooms formerly belonging to the
spam	apocryphal invisible lodger, and they desired nothing more.
spam	Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper. They were only
ham	three at table, and Miss Pross made the third. He regretted that Charles
spam	was not there; was more than half disposed to object to the loving
spam	little plot that kept him away; and drank to him affectionately.
ham	So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they separated.
spam	But, in the stillness of the third hour of the morning, Lucie came
ham	downstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from unshaped fears,
spam	beforehand.
spam	All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he lay
ham	asleep, his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and his
spam	hands lying quiet on the coverlet. She put her needless candle in the
ham	shadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to his;
ham	then, leaned over him, and looked at him.
ham	Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn; but, he
ham	covered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that he held the
spam	mastery of them even in his sleep. A more remarkable face in its quiet,
ham	resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen assailant, was not to be
ham	beheld in all the wide dominions of sleep, that night.
ham	She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer that
spam	she might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as his
spam	sorrows deserved. Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips once
ham	more, and went away. So, the sunrise came, and the shadows of the leaves
spam	of the plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as her lips had moved
ham	in praying for him.
ham	XVIII. Nine Days
spam	The marriage-day was shining brightly, and they were ready outside the
spam	closed door of the Doctor's room, where he was speaking with Charles
spam	Darnay. They were ready to go to church; the beautiful bride, Mr.
ham	Lorry, and Miss Pross--to whom the event, through a gradual process of
ham	reconcilement to the inevitable, would have been one of absolute bliss,
spam	but for the yet lingering consideration that her brother Solomon should
spam	have been the bridegroom.
ham	"And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride,
spam	and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet,
spam	pretty dress; "and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I brought
ham	you across the Channel, such a baby! Lord bless me! How little I thought
spam	what I was doing! How lightly I valued the obligation I was conferring
spam	on my friend Mr. Charles!"
ham	"You didn't mean it," remarked the matter-of-fact Miss Pross, "and
spam	therefore how could you know it? Nonsense!"
spam	"Really? Well; but don't cry," said the gentle Mr. Lorry.
ham	"I am not crying," said Miss Pross; "_you_ are."
ham	"I, my Pross?" (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant with her,
ham	on occasion.)
spam	"You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don't wonder at it. Such
ham	a present of plate as you have made 'em, is enough to bring tears into
ham	anybody's eyes. There's not a fork or a spoon in the collection," said
spam	Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after the box came, till
ham	I couldn't see it."
ham	"I am highly gratified," said Mr. Lorry, "though, upon my honour, I
ham	had no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance
ham	invisible to any one. Dear me! This is an occasion that makes a man
ham	speculate on all he has lost. Dear, dear, dear! To think that there
ham	might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time these fifty years almost!"
spam	"Not at all!" From Miss Pross.
spam	"You think there never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?" asked the
spam	gentleman of that name.
spam	"Pooh!" rejoined Miss Pross; "you were a bachelor in your cradle."
spam	"Well!" observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig, "that
ham	seems probable, too."
ham	"And you were cut out for a bachelor," pursued Miss Pross, "before you
spam	were put in your cradle."
ham	"Then, I think," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was very unhandsomely dealt
ham	with, and that I ought to have had a voice in the selection of my
ham	pattern. Enough! Now, my dear Lucie," drawing his arm soothingly round
ham	her waist, "I hear them moving in the next room, and Miss Pross and
spam	I, as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose the final
ham	opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear. You leave
ham	your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and as loving as your
ham	own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of; during the next
spam	fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts, even Tellson's
spam	shall go to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him. And when, at
ham	the fortnight's end, he comes to join you and your beloved husband, on
ham	your other fortnight's trip in Wales, you shall say that we have sent
spam	him to you in the best health and in the happiest frame. Now, I hear
ham	Somebody's step coming to the door. Let me kiss my dear girl with an
ham	old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comes to claim his
spam	own."
ham	For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at the
spam	well-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the bright
spam	golden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness and
spam	delicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as Adam.
spam	The door of the Doctor's room opened, and he came out with Charles
spam	Darnay. He was so deadly pale--which had not been the case when they
spam	went in together--that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his face.
ham	But, in the composure of his manner he was unaltered, except that to the
spam	shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy indication that the
spam	old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed over him, like a cold
ham	wind.
ham	He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the chariot
ham	which Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day. The rest followed in
spam	another carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strange
spam	eyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married.
ham	Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the little
ham	group when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling,
spam	glanced on the bride's hand, which were newly released from the
ham	dark obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets. They returned home to
ham	breakfast, and all went well, and in due course the golden hair that had
ham	mingled with the poor shoemaker's white locks in the Paris garret, were
ham	mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on the threshold of the
spam	door at parting.
spam	It was a hard parting, though it was not for long. But her father
ham	cheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her
spam	enfolding arms, "Take her, Charles! She is yours!"
ham	And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, and she was
ham	gone.
ham	The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and the
ham	preparations having been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry,
spam	and Miss Pross, were left quite alone. It was when they turned into
spam	the welcome shade of the cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed a great
spam	change to have come over the Doctor; as if the golden arm uplifted
spam	there, had struck him a poisoned blow.
spam	He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been
ham	expected in him when the occasion for repression was gone. But, it was
ham	the old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through his absent
ham	manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering away into his own
ham	room when they got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded of Defarge the
ham	wine-shop keeper, and the starlight ride.
ham	"I think," he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration, "I
spam	think we had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him.
ham	I must look in at Tellson's; so I will go there at once and come back
spam	presently. Then, we will take him a ride into the country, and dine
ham	there, and all will be well."
spam	It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson's, than to look out of
spam	Tellson's. He was detained two hours. When he came back, he ascended the
ham	old staircase alone, having asked no question of the servant; going thus
spam	into the Doctor's rooms, he was stopped by a low sound of knocking.
spam	"Good God!" he said, with a start. "What's that?"
spam	Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear. "O me, O me! All is
spam	lost!" cried she, wringing her hands. "What is to be told to Ladybird?
spam	He doesn't know me, and is making shoes!"
ham	Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into the
ham	Doctor's room. The bench was turned towards the light, as it had been
ham	when he had seen the shoemaker at his work before, and his head was bent
spam	down, and he was very busy.
ham	"Doctor Manette. My dear friend, Doctor Manette!"
ham	The Doctor looked at him for a moment--half inquiringly, half as if he
ham	were angry at being spoken to--and bent over his work again.
spam	He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at the
ham	throat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even the old
spam	haggard, faded surface of face had come back to him. He worked
spam	hard--impatiently--as if in some sense of having been interrupted.
spam	Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it was a
ham	shoe of the old size and shape. He took up another that was lying by
spam	him, and asked what it was.
spam	"A young lady's walking shoe," he muttered, without looking up. "It
spam	ought to have been finished long ago. Let it be."
ham	"But, Doctor Manette. Look at me!"
spam	He obeyed, in the old mechanically submissive manner, without pausing in
ham	his work.
ham	"You know me, my dear friend? Think again. This is not your proper
spam	occupation. Think, dear friend!"
ham	Nothing would induce him to speak more. He looked up, for an instant at
ham	a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would extract
spam	a word from him. He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence, and
ham	words fell on him as they would have fallen on an echoless wall, or on
ham	the air. The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry could discover, was, that
ham	he sometimes furtively looked up without being asked. In that, there
spam	seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as though he were
ham	trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind.
ham	Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as important above
spam	all others; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie;
ham	the second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him. In
ham	conjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards the latter
ham	precaution, by giving out that the Doctor was not well, and required a
spam	few days of complete rest. In aid of the kind deception to be practised
ham	on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describing his having been
spam	called away professionally, and referring to an imaginary letter of
ham	two or three hurried lines in his own hand, represented to have been
ham	addressed to her by the same post.
spam	These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in
ham	the hope of his coming to himself. If that should happen soon, he kept
ham	another course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that he
spam	thought the best, on the Doctor's case.
ham	In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course
ham	being thereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him
spam	attentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so. He
spam	therefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson's for the
spam	first time in his life, and took his post by the window in the same
spam	room.
ham	He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speak
ham	to him, since, on being pressed, he became worried. He abandoned that
ham	attempt on the first day, and resolved merely to keep himself always
ham	before him, as a silent protest against the delusion into which he had
ham	fallen, or was falling. He remained, therefore, in his seat near the
spam	window, reading and writing, and expressing in as many pleasant and
spam	natural ways as he could think of, that it was a free place.
spam	Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on,
spam	that first day, until it was too dark to see--worked on, half an hour
ham	after Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to read or write.
spam	When he put his tools aside as useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry rose
spam	and said to him:
spam	"Will you go out?"
ham	He looked down at the floor on either side of him in the old manner,
ham	looked up in the old manner, and repeated in the old low voice:
spam	"Out?"
spam	"Yes; for a walk with me. Why not?"
spam	He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more. But, Mr.
spam	Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the dusk,
spam	with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that he was in
ham	some misty way asking himself, "Why not?" The sagacity of the man of
spam	business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it.
spam	Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed him
spam	at intervals from the adjoining room. He paced up and down for a long
ham	time before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down, he
ham	fell asleep. In the morning, he was up betimes, and went straight to his
spam	bench and to work.
spam	On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name,
ham	and spoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to them. He
ham	returned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was said, and
spam	that he thought about it, however confusedly. This encouraged Mr. Lorry
spam	to have Miss Pross in with her work, several times during the day;
spam	at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie, and of her father then
spam	present, precisely in the usual manner, and as if there were nothing
ham	amiss. This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, not long
ham	enough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorry's
spam	friendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he
ham	appeared to be stirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding
ham	him.
ham	When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:
ham	"Dear Doctor, will you go out?"
spam	As before, he repeated, "Out?"
ham	"Yes; for a walk with me. Why not?"
spam	This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answer
ham	from him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned. In the
spam	meanwhile, the Doctor had removed to the seat in the window, and had
ham	sat there looking down at the plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry's return, he
ham	slipped away to his bench.
spam	The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry's hope darkened, and his
spam	heart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day.
ham	The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth. Five days, six days,
spam	seven days, eight days, nine days.
ham	With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavier and
ham	heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time. The secret was
spam	well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could not fail to
spam	observe that the shoemaker, whose hand had been a little out at first,
ham	was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had never been so intent on
spam	his work, and that his hands had never been so nimble and expert, as in
spam	the dusk of the ninth evening.
spam	XIX. An Opinion
ham	Worn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post. On the
ham	tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining of the sun
spam	into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it was dark
spam	night.
ham	He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had
spam	done so, whether he was not still asleep. For, going to the door of the
spam	Doctor's room and looking in, he perceived that the shoemaker's bench
spam	and tools were put aside again, and that the Doctor himself sat reading
spam	at the window. He was in his usual morning dress, and his face (which
ham	Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very pale, was calmly
spam	studious and attentive.
spam	Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt
spam	giddily uncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemaking might
ham	not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes show him his
spam	friend before him in his accustomed clothing and aspect, and employed
ham	as usual; and was there any sign within their range, that the change of
ham	which he had so strong an impression had actually happened?
spam	It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, the
spam	answer being obvious. If the impression were not produced by a real
spam	corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there?
ham	How came he to have fallen asleep, in his clothes, on the sofa in Doctor
spam	Manette's consulting-room, and to be debating these points outside the
ham	Doctor's bedroom door in the early morning?
spam	Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side. If he
ham	had had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have
spam	resolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none.
spam	He advised that they should let the time go by until the regular
spam	breakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor as if nothing unusual
spam	had occurred. If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind, Mr.
spam	Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidance from
spam	the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.
spam	Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was worked
spam	out with care. Having abundance of time for his usual methodical
spam	toilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at the breakfast-hour in his usual
spam	white linen, and with his usual neat leg. The Doctor was summoned in the
ham	usual way, and came to breakfast.
ham	So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping those
ham	delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be the only safe
spam	advance, he at first supposed that his daughter's marriage had taken
spam	place yesterday. An incidental allusion, purposely thrown out, to
spam	the day of the week, and the day of the month, set him thinking and
spam	counting, and evidently made him uneasy. In all other respects, however,
spam	he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry determined to have the aid
spam	he sought. And that aid was his own.
spam	Therefore, when the breakfast was done and cleared away, and he and the
ham	Doctor were left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:
spam	"My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence, on a
spam	very curious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say, it is
ham	very curious to me; perhaps, to your better information it may be less
ham	so."
spam	Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, the
spam	Doctor looked troubled, and listened attentively. He had already glanced
spam	at his hands more than once.
ham	"Doctor Manette," said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the
spam	arm, "the case is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine. Pray
ham	give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake--and above all,
spam	for his daughter's--his daughter's, my dear Manette."
ham	"If I understand," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, "some mental
spam	shock--?"
ham	"Yes!"
spam	"Be explicit," said the Doctor. "Spare no detail."
ham	Mr. Lorry saw that they understood one another, and proceeded.
ham	"My dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock,
spam	of great acuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings,
spam	the--the--as you express it--the mind. The mind. It is the case of a
ham	shock under which the sufferer was borne down, one cannot say for how
ham	long, because I believe he cannot calculate the time himself, and there
ham	are no other means of getting at it. It is the case of a shock from
spam	which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot trace
ham	himself--as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner. It is
ham	the case of a shock from which he has recovered, so completely, as to
spam	be a highly intelligent man, capable of close application of mind, and
ham	great exertion of body, and of constantly making fresh additions to his
ham	stock of knowledge, which was already very large. But, unfortunately,
spam	there has been," he paused and took a deep breath--"a slight relapse."
ham	The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, "Of how long duration?"
ham	"Nine days and nights."
ham	"How did it show itself? I infer," glancing at his hands again, "in the
ham	resumption of some old pursuit connected with the shock?"
spam	"That is the fact."
spam	"Now, did you ever see him," asked the Doctor, distinctly and
spam	collectedly, though in the same low voice, "engaged in that pursuit
spam	originally?"
ham	"Once."
spam	"And when the relapse fell on him, was he in most respects--or in all
ham	respects--as he was then?"
ham	"I think in all respects."
spam	"You spoke of his daughter. Does his daughter know of the relapse?"
ham	"No. It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept from her.
spam	It is known only to myself, and to one other who may be trusted."
spam	The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, "That was very kind. That was
ham	very thoughtful!" Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return, and neither of
spam	the two spoke for a little while.
spam	"Now, my dear Manette," said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most
spam	considerate and most affectionate way, "I am a mere man of business,
ham	and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters. I do not
ham	possess the kind of information necessary; I do not possess the kind of
ham	intelligence; I want guiding. There is no man in this world on whom
spam	I could so rely for right guidance, as on you. Tell me, how does this
spam	relapse come about? Is there danger of another? Could a repetition of it
ham	be prevented? How should a repetition of it be treated? How does it come
ham	about at all? What can I do for my friend? No man ever can have been
ham	more desirous in his heart to serve a friend, than I am to serve mine,
ham	if I knew how.
spam	"But I don't know how to originate, in such a case. If your sagacity,
spam	knowledge, and experience, could put me on the right track, I might be
ham	able to do so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little.
ham	Pray discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly,
ham	and teach me how to be a little more useful."
ham	Doctor Manette sat meditating after these earnest words were spoken, and
spam	Mr. Lorry did not press him.
ham	"I think it probable," said the Doctor, breaking silence with an effort,
ham	"that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, was not quite
spam	unforeseen by its subject."
ham	"Was it dreaded by him?" Mr. Lorry ventured to ask.
spam	"Very much." He said it with an involuntary shudder.
spam	"You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the sufferer's
ham	mind, and how difficult--how almost impossible--it is, for him to force
ham	himself to utter a word upon the topic that oppresses him."
spam	"Would he," asked Mr. Lorry, "be sensibly relieved if he could prevail
spam	upon himself to impart that secret brooding to any one, when it is on
spam	him?"
ham	"I think so. But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible. I even
spam	believe it--in some cases--to be quite impossible."
spam	"Now," said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the Doctor's arm again,
spam	after a short silence on both sides, "to what would you refer this
ham	attack?"
ham	"I believe," returned Doctor Manette, "that there had been a strong and
ham	extraordinary revival of the train of thought and remembrance that
spam	was the first cause of the malady. Some intense associations of a most
spam	distressing nature were vividly recalled, I think. It is probable that
spam	there had long been a dread lurking in his mind, that those associations
ham	would be recalled--say, under certain circumstances--say, on a
spam	particular occasion. He tried to prepare himself in vain; perhaps the
spam	effort to prepare himself made him less able to bear it."
spam	"Would he remember what took place in the relapse?" asked Mr. Lorry,
spam	with natural hesitation.
spam	The Doctor looked desolately round the room, shook his head, and
spam	answered, in a low voice, "Not at all."
ham	"Now, as to the future," hinted Mr. Lorry.
spam	"As to the future," said the Doctor, recovering firmness, "I should have
spam	great hope. As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so soon, I
ham	should have great hope. He, yielding under the pressure of a complicated
spam	something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen and contended against,
ham	and recovering after the cloud had burst and passed, I should hope that
ham	the worst was over."
spam	"Well, well! That's good comfort. I am thankful!" said Mr. Lorry.
ham	"I am thankful!" repeated the Doctor, bending his head with reverence.
ham	"There are two other points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxious to
ham	be instructed. I may go on?"
spam	"You cannot do your friend a better service." The Doctor gave him his
ham	hand.
spam	"To the first, then. He is of a studious habit, and unusually energetic;
ham	he applies himself with great ardour to the acquisition of professional
ham	knowledge, to the conducting of experiments, to many things. Now, does
spam	he do too much?"
ham	"I think not. It may be the character of his mind, to be always in
ham	singular need of occupation. That may be, in part, natural to it; in
ham	part, the result of affliction. The less it was occupied with healthy
spam	things, the more it would be in danger of turning in the unhealthy
ham	direction. He may have observed himself, and made the discovery."
spam	"You are sure that he is not under too great a strain?"
spam	"I think I am quite sure of it."
spam	"My dear Manette, if he were overworked now--"
spam	"My dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be. There has been a
spam	violent stress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight."
spam	"Excuse me, as a persistent man of business. Assuming for a moment,
ham	that he _was_ overworked; it would show itself in some renewal of this
ham	disorder?"
ham	"I do not think so. I do not think," said Doctor Manette with the
spam	firmness of self-conviction, "that anything but the one train of
ham	association would renew it. I think that, henceforth, nothing but some
ham	extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it. After what has
spam	happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagine any
ham	such violent sounding of that string again. I trust, and I almost
ham	believe, that the circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted."
ham	He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing
spam	would overset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with the
spam	confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personal
ham	endurance and distress. It was not for his friend to abate that
ham	confidence. He professed himself more relieved and encouraged than he
ham	really was, and approached his second and last point. He felt it to
spam	be the most difficult of all; but, remembering his old Sunday morning
ham	conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen in the
spam	last nine days, he knew that he must face it.
ham	"The occupation resumed under the influence of this passing affliction
spam	so happily recovered from," said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, "we
ham	will call--Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work. We will say, to put a
spam	case and for the sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad
ham	time, to work at a little forge. We will say that he was unexpectedly
spam	found at his forge again. Is it not a pity that he should keep it by
ham	him?"
ham	The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot
spam	nervously on the ground.
ham	"He has always kept it by him," said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious look at
ham	his friend. "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"
spam	Still, the Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously on the
ham	ground.
spam	"You do not find it easy to advise me?" said Mr. Lorry. "I quite
ham	understand it to be a nice question. And yet I think--" And there he
spam	shook his head, and stopped.
spam	"You see," said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause,
ham	"it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings
ham	of this poor man's mind. He once yearned so frightfully for that
spam	occupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it relieved
spam	his pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the fingers for
ham	the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he became more
spam	practised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity of the mental
spam	torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought of putting it
ham	quite out of his reach. Even now, when I believe he is more hopeful of
spam	himself than he has ever been, and even speaks of himself with a kind
spam	of confidence, the idea that he might need that old employment, and not
ham	find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror, like that which one may
spam	fancy strikes to the heart of a lost child."
ham	He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes to Mr. Lorry's
spam	face.
spam	"But may not--mind! I ask for information, as a plodding man of business
spam	who only deals with such material objects as guineas, shillings, and
spam	bank-notes--may not the retention of the thing involve the retention of
ham	the idea? If the thing were gone, my dear Manette, might not the fear go
spam	with it? In short, is it not a concession to the misgiving, to keep the
ham	forge?"
ham	There was another silence.
ham	"You see, too," said the Doctor, tremulously, "it is such an old
ham	companion."
spam	"I would not keep it," said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gained
spam	in firmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted. "I would recommend him to
spam	sacrifice it. I only want your authority. I am sure it does no good.
spam	Come! Give me your authority, like a dear good man. For his daughter's
ham	sake, my dear Manette!"
ham	Very strange to see what a struggle there was within him!
ham	"In her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it. But, I would not take
ham	it away while he was present. Let it be removed when he is not there;
ham	let him miss his old companion after an absence."
spam	Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended. They
ham	passed the day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored. On the
ham	three following days he remained perfectly well, and on the fourteenth
ham	day he went away to join Lucie and her husband. The precaution that
ham	had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorry had previously
ham	explained to him, and he had written to Lucie in accordance with it, and
spam	she had no suspicions.
spam	On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry went into
spam	his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by Miss Pross
ham	carrying a light. There, with closed doors, and in a mysterious and
spam	guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemaker's bench to pieces, while
ham	Miss Pross held the candle as if she were assisting at a murder--for
spam	which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no unsuitable figure. The
spam	burning of the body (previously reduced to pieces convenient for the
ham	purpose) was commenced without delay in the kitchen fire; and the tools,
ham	shoes, and leather, were buried in the garden. So wicked do destruction
spam	and secrecy appear to honest minds, that Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross,
ham	while engaged in the commission of their deed and in the removal of its
spam	traces, almost felt, and almost looked, like accomplices in a horrible
spam	crime.
ham	XX. A Plea
spam	When the newly-married pair came home, the first person who appeared, to
spam	offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton. They had not been at home
spam	many hours, when he presented himself. He was not improved in habits, or
spam	in looks, or in manner; but there was a certain rugged air of fidelity
ham	about him, which was new to the observation of Charles Darnay.
spam	He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, and of
ham	speaking to him when no one overheard.
ham	"Mr. Darnay," said Carton, "I wish we might be friends."
ham	"We are already friends, I hope."
ham	"You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don't
ham	mean any fashion of speech. Indeed, when I say I wish we might be
ham	friends, I scarcely mean quite that, either."
ham	Charles Darnay--as was natural--asked him, in all good-humour and
spam	good-fellowship, what he did mean?
spam	"Upon my life," said Carton, smiling, "I find that easier to comprehend
ham	in my own mind, than to convey to yours. However, let me try. You
spam	remember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk than--than
ham	usual?"
ham	"I remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to confess that
ham	you had been drinking."
ham	"I remember it too. The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me, for I
spam	always remember them. I hope it may be taken into account one day,
ham	when all days are at an end for me! Don't be alarmed; I am not going to
ham	preach."
ham	"I am not at all alarmed. Earnestness in you, is anything but alarming
ham	to me."
ham	"Ah!" said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he waved that
spam	away. "On the drunken occasion in question (one of a large number, as
ham	you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and not liking you. I
spam	wish you would forget it."
spam	"I forgot it long ago."
ham	"Fashion of speech again! But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy to
spam	me, as you represent it to be to you. I have by no means forgotten it,
spam	and a light answer does not help me to forget it."
spam	"If it was a light answer," returned Darnay, "I beg your forgiveness
ham	for it. I had no other object than to turn a slight thing, which, to my
ham	surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside. I declare to you, on the
ham	faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my mind. Good
spam	Heaven, what was there to dismiss! Have I had nothing more important to
ham	remember, in the great service you rendered me that day?"
spam	"As to the great service," said Carton, "I am bound to avow to you, when
spam	you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professional claptrap, I
spam	don't know that I cared what became of you, when I rendered it.--Mind! I
spam	say when I rendered it; I am speaking of the past."
spam	"You make light of the obligation," returned Darnay, "but I will not
ham	quarrel with _your_ light answer."
spam	"Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me! I have gone aside from my purpose;
spam	I was speaking about our being friends. Now, you know me; you know I am
spam	incapable of all the higher and better flights of men. If you doubt it,
spam	ask Stryver, and he'll tell you so."
ham	"I prefer to form my own opinion, without the aid of his."
spam	"Well! At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has never done
ham	any good, and never will."
ham	"I don't know that you 'never will.'"
spam	"But I do, and you must take my word for it. Well! If you could endure
spam	to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferent
ham	reputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask that I might be
ham	permitted to come and go as a privileged person here; that I might
ham	be regarded as an useless (and I would add, if it were not for the
ham	resemblance I detected between you and me, an unornamental) piece of
ham	furniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken no notice of. I
spam	doubt if I should abuse the permission. It is a hundred to one if I
ham	should avail myself of it four times in a year. It would satisfy me, I
spam	dare say, to know that I had it."
ham	"Will you try?"
ham	"That is another way of saying that I am placed on the footing I have
spam	indicated. I thank you, Darnay. I may use that freedom with your name?"
ham	"I think so, Carton, by this time."
spam	They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away. Within a minute
ham	afterwards, he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as ever.
ham	When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss
ham	Pross, the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of
spam	this conversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a
spam	problem of carelessness and recklessness. He spoke of him, in short, not
ham	bitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might who saw
spam	him as he showed himself.
ham	He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair young
ham	wife; but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms, he found
ham	her waiting for him with the old pretty lifting of the forehead strongly
spam	marked.
ham	"We are thoughtful to-night!" said Darnay, drawing his arm about her.
ham	"Yes, dearest Charles," with her hands on his breast, and the inquiring
spam	and attentive expression fixed upon him; "we are rather thoughtful
spam	to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night."
spam	"What is it, my Lucie?"
ham	"Will you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg you not to
spam	ask it?"
spam	"Will I promise? What will I not promise to my Love?"
ham	What, indeed, with his hand putting aside the golden hair from the
ham	cheek, and his other hand against the heart that beat for him!
spam	"I think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and
ham	respect than you expressed for him to-night."
ham	"Indeed, my own? Why so?"
spam	"That is what you are not to ask me. But I think--I know--he does."
spam	"If you know it, it is enough. What would you have me do, my Life?"
ham	"I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, and very
spam	lenient on his faults when he is not by. I would ask you to believe that
ham	he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that there are deep
spam	wounds in it. My dear, I have seen it bleeding."
ham	"It is a painful reflection to me," said Charles Darnay, quite
ham	astounded, "that I should have done him any wrong. I never thought this
spam	of him."
ham	"My husband, it is so. I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is
ham	scarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparable
spam	now. But, I am sure that he is capable of good things, gentle things,
spam	even magnanimous things."
ham	She looked so beautiful in the purity of her faith in this lost man,
ham	that her husband could have looked at her as she was for hours.
spam	"And, O my dearest Love!" she urged, clinging nearer to him, laying her
ham	head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, "remember how strong
ham	we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!"
ham	The supplication touched him home. "I will always remember it, dear
ham	Heart! I will remember it as long as I live."
spam	He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and folded
ham	her in his arms. If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark streets,
ham	could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen the drops
ham	of pity kissed away by her husband from the soft blue eyes so loving of
ham	that husband, he might have cried to the night--and the words would not
spam	have parted from his lips for the first time--
spam	"God bless her for her sweet compassion!"
spam	XXI. Echoing Footsteps
ham	A wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner where
spam	the Doctor lived. Ever busily winding the golden thread which bound
ham	her husband, and her father, and herself, and her old directress and
ham	companion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still house in
spam	the tranquilly resounding corner, listening to the echoing footsteps of
spam	years.
ham	At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy young wife,
spam	when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes would be
ham	dimmed. For, there was something coming in the echoes, something light,
ham	afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirred her heart too much.
ham	Fluttering hopes and doubts--hopes, of a love as yet unknown to her:
spam	doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy that new delight--divided
ham	her breast. Among the echoes then, there would arise the sound of
ham	footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts of the husband who would
spam	be left so desolate, and who would mourn for her so much, swelled to her
spam	eyes, and broke like waves.
ham	That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom. Then, among the
ham	advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and the sound of
ham	her prattling words. Let greater echoes resound as they would, the young
ham	mother at the cradle side could always hear those coming. They came, and
spam	the shady house was sunny with a child's laugh, and the Divine friend of
ham	children, to whom in her trouble she had confided hers, seemed to take
ham	her child in his arms, as He took the child of old, and made it a sacred
spam	joy to her.
spam	Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all together,
ham	weaving the service of her happy influence through the tissue of all
ham	their lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in the
spam	echoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds. Her husband's
ham	step was strong and prosperous among them; her father's firm and equal.
spam	Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string, awakening the echoes, as an
spam	unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawing the earth under the
ham	plane-tree in the garden!
ham	Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were not
ham	harsh nor cruel. Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a halo on a
ham	pillow round the worn face of a little boy, and he said, with a radiant
spam	smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both, and to
spam	leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must go!" those were not
spam	tears all of agony that wetted his young mother's cheek, as the spirit
ham	departed from her embrace that had been entrusted to it. Suffer them and
ham	forbid them not. They see my Father's face. O Father, blessed words!
spam	Thus, the rustling of an Angel's wings got blended with the other
spam	echoes, and they were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breath
ham	of Heaven. Sighs of the winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were
spam	mingled with them also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushed
spam	murmur--like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore--as
ham	the little Lucie, comically studious at the task of the morning, or
ham	dressing a doll at her mother's footstool, chattered in the tongues of
spam	the Two Cities that were blended in her life.
spam	The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton. Some
ham	half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of coming in
ham	uninvited, and would sit among them through the evening, as he had once
spam	done often. He never came there heated with wine. And one other thing
spam	regarding him was whispered in the echoes, which has been whispered by
spam	all true echoes for ages and ages.
spam	No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a
spam	blameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a mother,
ham	but her children had a strange sympathy with him--an instinctive
ham	delicacy of pity for him. What fine hidden sensibilities are touched in
ham	such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was so here. Carton
spam	was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held out her chubby arms,
ham	and he kept his place with her as she grew. The little boy had spoken of
spam	him, almost at the last. "Poor Carton! Kiss him for me!"
spam	Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great engine
ham	forcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend in
spam	his wake, like a boat towed astern. As the boat so favoured is usually
spam	in a rough plight, and mostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped
spam	life of it. But, easy and strong custom, unhappily so much easier and
spam	stronger in him than any stimulating sense of desert or disgrace, made
spam	it the life he was to lead; and he no more thought of emerging from his
ham	state of lion's jackal, than any real jackal may be supposed to think of
ham	rising to be a lion. Stryver was rich; had married a florid widow with
ham	property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining about them
ham	but the straight hair of their dumpling heads.
ham	These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the most
spam	offensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like three
spam	sheep to the quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to
spam	Lucie's husband: delicately saying "Halloa! here are three lumps of
ham	bread-and-cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!" The polite
spam	rejection of the three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr.
ham	Stryver with indignation, which he afterwards turned to account in the
ham	training of the young gentlemen, by directing them to beware of the
spam	pride of Beggars, like that tutor-fellow. He was also in the habit of
spam	declaiming to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on the arts
spam	Mrs. Darnay had once put in practice to "catch" him, and on the
ham	diamond-cut-diamond arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him "not
spam	to be caught." Some of his King's Bench familiars, who were occasionally
ham	parties to the full-bodied wine and the lie, excused him for the
spam	latter by saying that he had told it so often, that he believed
ham	it himself--which is surely such an incorrigible aggravation of an
spam	originally bad offence, as to justify any such offender's being carried
spam	off to some suitably retired spot, and there hanged out of the way.
spam	These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive, sometimes
spam	amused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, until her little
spam	daughter was six years old. How near to her heart the echoes of her
ham	child's tread came, and those of her own dear father's, always active
spam	and self-possessed, and those of her dear husband's, need not be told.
ham	Nor, how the lightest echo of their united home, directed by herself
ham	with such a wise and elegant thrift that it was more abundant than any
spam	waste, was music to her. Nor, how there were echoes all about her, sweet
ham	in her ears, of the many times her father had told her that he found her
ham	more devoted to him married (if that could be) than single, and of the
ham	many times her husband had said to her that no cares and duties seemed
ham	to divide her love for him or her help to him, and asked her "What is
ham	the magic secret, my darling, of your being everything to all of us,
spam	as if there were only one of us, yet never seeming to be hurried, or to
ham	have too much to do?"
ham	But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacingly
ham	in the corner all through this space of time. And it was now, about
ham	little Lucie's sixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound,
spam	as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.
spam	On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, Mr.
ham	Lorry came in late, from Tellson's, and sat himself down by Lucie and
ham	her husband in the dark window. It was a hot, wild night, and they were
spam	all three reminded of the old Sunday night when they had looked at the
spam	lightning from the same place.
spam	"I began to think," said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, "that
spam	I should have to pass the night at Tellson's. We have been so full of
spam	business all day, that we have not known what to do first, or which way
ham	to turn. There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we have actually a
spam	run of confidence upon us! Our customers over there, seem not to be able
ham	to confide their property to us fast enough. There is positively a mania
ham	among some of them for sending it to England."
ham	"That has a bad look," said Darnay--
spam	"A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay? Yes, but we don't know what reason
ham	there is in it. People are so unreasonable! Some of us at Tellson's are
ham	getting old, and we really can't be troubled out of the ordinary course
spam	without due occasion."
spam	"Still," said Darnay, "you know how gloomy and threatening the sky is."
ham	"I know that, to be sure," assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade
ham	himself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled, "but I
ham	am determined to be peevish after my long day's botheration. Where is
spam	Manette?"
spam	"Here he is," said the Doctor, entering the dark room at the moment.
ham	"I am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and forebodings by
ham	which I have been surrounded all day long, have made me nervous without
ham	reason. You are not going out, I hope?"
ham	"No; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like," said the
ham	Doctor.
spam	"I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind. I am not fit to be
ham	pitted against you to-night. Is the teaboard still there, Lucie? I can't
ham	see."
ham	"Of course, it has been kept for you."
ham	"Thank ye, my dear. The precious child is safe in bed?"
ham	"And sleeping soundly."
spam	"That's right; all safe and well! I don't know why anything should be
spam	otherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so put out
ham	all day, and I am not as young as I was! My tea, my dear! Thank ye. Now,
spam	come and take your place in the circle, and let us sit quiet, and hear
ham	the echoes about which you have your theory."
ham	"Not a theory; it was a fancy."
spam	"A fancy, then, my wise pet," said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand. "They
spam	are very numerous and very loud, though, are they not? Only hear them!"
spam	Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into anybody's
ham	life, footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, the
ham	footsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as the little circle sat in
spam	the dark London window.
ham	Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrows
spam	heaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the billowy
spam	heads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in the sun. A tremendous
spam	roar arose from the throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest of naked arms
spam	struggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind:
ham	all the fingers convulsively clutching at every weapon or semblance of a
ham	weapon that was thrown up from the depths below, no matter how far off.
ham	Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began, through what
spam	agency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, over the
spam	heads of the crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in the throng could
spam	have told; but, muskets were being distributed--so were cartridges,
ham	powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives, axes, pikes, every
ham	weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover or devise. People who
ham	could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves with bleeding hands to
ham	force stones and bricks out of their places in walls. Every pulse and
ham	heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and at high-fever heat.
ham	Every living creature there held life as of no account, and was demented
ham	with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.
spam	As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this raging
ham	circled round Defarge's wine-shop, and every human drop in the caldron
ham	had a tendency to be sucked towards the vortex where Defarge himself,
spam	already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms,
ham	thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm
spam	another, laboured and strove in the thickest of the uproar.
ham	"Keep near to me, Jacques Three," cried Defarge; "and do you, Jacques
ham	One and Two, separate and put yourselves at the head of as many of these
ham	patriots as you can. Where is my wife?"
ham	"Eh, well! Here you see me!" said madame, composed as ever, but not
spam	knitting to-day. Madame's resolute right hand was occupied with an axe,
ham	in place of the usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistol
ham	and a cruel knife.
ham	"Where do you go, my wife?"
ham	"I go," said madame, "with you at present. You shall see me at the head
ham	of women, by-and-bye."
ham	"Come, then!" cried Defarge, in a resounding voice. "Patriots and
ham	friends, we are ready! The Bastille!"
ham	With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been shaped
spam	into the detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave, depth on
spam	depth, and overflowed the city to that point. Alarm-bells ringing, drums
spam	beating, the sea raging and thundering on its new beach, the attack
spam	began.
spam	Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great
spam	towers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. Through the fire and through
ham	the smoke--in the fire and in the smoke, for the sea cast him up against
spam	a cannon, and on the instant he became a cannonier--Defarge of the
ham	wine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours.
spam	Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,
spam	cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. One drawbridge down! "Work, comrades
ham	all, work! Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand, Jacques
spam	Two Thousand, Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in the name of all
spam	the Angels or the Devils--which you prefer--work!" Thus Defarge of the
spam	wine-shop, still at his gun, which had long grown hot.
spam	"To me, women!" cried madame his wife. "What! We can kill as well as
spam	the men when the place is taken!" And to her, with a shrill thirsty
ham	cry, trooping women variously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and
ham	revenge.
ham	Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the single
ham	drawbridge, the massive stone walls, and the eight great towers. Slight
spam	displacements of the raging sea, made by the falling wounded. Flashing
ham	weapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard work
ham	at neighbouring barricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys,
spam	execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and rattle, and the
ham	furious sounding of the living sea; but, still the deep ditch, and the
spam	single drawbridge, and the massive stone walls, and the eight great
ham	towers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at his gun, grown doubly hot
ham	by the service of Four fierce hours.
spam	A white flag from within the fortress, and a parley--this dimly
spam	perceptible through the raging storm, nothing audible in it--suddenly
ham	the sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of the
spam	wine-shop over the lowered drawbridge, past the massive stone outer
ham	walls, in among the eight great towers surrendered!
spam	So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that even to
spam	draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he had been
ham	struggling in the surf at the South Sea, until he was landed in the
ham	outer courtyard of the Bastille. There, against an angle of a wall, he
ham	made a struggle to look about him. Jacques Three was nearly at his side;
spam	Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women, was visible in the
ham	inner distance, and her knife was in her hand. Everywhere was tumult,
spam	exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment, astounding noise, yet
spam	furious dumb-show.
ham	"The Prisoners!"
ham	"The Records!"
spam	"The secret cells!"
ham	"The instruments of torture!"
ham	"The Prisoners!"
ham	Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, "The Prisoners!" was
ham	the cry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if there were an
ham	eternity of people, as well as of time and space. When the foremost
spam	billows rolled past, bearing the prison officers with them, and
spam	threatening them all with instant death if any secret nook remained
spam	undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on the breast of one of
ham	these men--a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in his
ham	hand--separated him from the rest, and got him between himself and the
spam	wall.
ham	"Show me the North Tower!" said Defarge. "Quick!"
ham	"I will faithfully," replied the man, "if you will come with me. But
spam	there is no one there."
spam	"What is the meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?" asked
ham	Defarge. "Quick!"
spam	"The meaning, monsieur?"
ham	"Does it mean a captive, or a place of captivity? Or do you mean that I
spam	shall strike you dead?"
ham	"Kill him!" croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up.
ham	"Monsieur, it is a cell."
ham	"Show it me!"
ham	"Pass this way, then."
spam	Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently disappointed
spam	by the dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promise bloodshed,
ham	held by Defarge's arm as he held by the turnkey's. Their three heads had
ham	been close together during this brief discourse, and it had been as much
spam	as they could do to hear one another, even then: so tremendous was the
spam	noise of the living ocean, in its irruption into the Fortress, and
spam	its inundation of the courts and passages and staircases. All around
ham	outside, too, it beat the walls with a deep, hoarse roar, from which,
ham	occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult broke and leaped into the
ham	air like spray.
ham	Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, past
ham	hideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps,
spam	and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry
ham	waterfalls than staircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three,
ham	linked hand and arm, went with all the speed they could make. Here and
ham	there, especially at first, the inundation started on them and swept by;
ham	but when they had done descending, and were winding and climbing up a
spam	tower, they were alone. Hemmed in here by the massive thickness of walls
ham	and arches, the storm within the fortress and without was only audible
ham	to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out of which they had
spam	come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.
spam	The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock, swung
ham	the door slowly open, and said, as they all bent their heads and passed
ham	in:
ham	"One hundred and five, North Tower!"
spam	There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall,
ham	with a stone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen by
ham	stooping low and looking up. There was a small chimney, heavily barred
ham	across, a few feet within. There was a heap of old feathery wood-ashes
ham	on the hearth. There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed. There were
ham	the four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them.
spam	"Pass that torch slowly along these walls, that I may see them," said
ham	Defarge to the turnkey.
ham	The man obeyed, and Defarge followed the light closely with his eyes.
spam	"Stop!--Look here, Jacques!"
ham	"A. M.!" croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily.
spam	"Alexandre Manette," said Defarge in his ear, following the letters
ham	with his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder. "And here he
spam	wrote 'a poor physician.' And it was he, without doubt, who scratched
spam	a calendar on this stone. What is that in your hand? A crowbar? Give it
ham	me!"
ham	He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand. He made a sudden
spam	exchange of the two instruments, and turning on the worm-eaten stool and
ham	table, beat them to pieces in a few blows.
spam	"Hold the light higher!" he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey. "Look
spam	among those fragments with care, Jacques. And see! Here is my knife,"
spam	throwing it to him; "rip open that bed, and search the straw. Hold the
spam	light higher, you!"
ham	With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth, and,
ham	peering up the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with the crowbar,
ham	and worked at the iron grating across it. In a few minutes, some mortar
spam	and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face to avoid; and
ham	in it, and in the old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in the chimney
spam	into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he groped with a
spam	cautious touch.
ham	"Nothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?"
ham	"Nothing."
ham	"Let us collect them together, in the middle of the cell. So! Light
spam	them, you!"
ham	The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot. Stooping
ham	again to come out at the low-arched door, they left it burning, and
spam	retraced their way to the courtyard; seeming to recover their sense
ham	of hearing as they came down, until they were in the raging flood once
spam	more.
spam	They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself. Saint
spam	Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in the guard
spam	upon the governor who had defended the Bastille and shot the people.
ham	Otherwise, the governor would not be marched to the Hotel de Ville for
spam	judgment. Otherwise, the governor would escape, and the people's
spam	blood (suddenly of some value, after many years of worthlessness) be
ham	unavenged.
spam	In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to
ham	encompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red
spam	decoration, there was but one quite steady figure, and that was a
ham	woman's. "See, there is my husband!" she cried, pointing him out.
ham	"See Defarge!" She stood immovable close to the grim old officer, and
spam	remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to him through
ham	the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along; remained immovable
spam	close to him when he was got near his destination, and began to
ham	be struck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when the
ham	long-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him
ham	when he dropped dead under it, that, suddenly animated, she put her foot
spam	upon his neck, and with her cruel knife--long ready--hewed off his head.
ham	The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible idea
ham	of hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do. Saint
ham	Antoine's blood was up, and the blood of tyranny and domination by the
spam	iron hand was down--down on the steps of the Hotel de Ville where the
ham	governor's body lay--down on the sole of the shoe of Madame Defarge
ham	where she had trodden on the body to steady it for mutilation. "Lower
spam	the lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for a new
spam	means of death; "here is one of his soldiers to be left on guard!" The
spam	swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea rushed on.
ham	The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheaving
ham	of wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whose forces
ham	were yet unknown. The remorseless sea of turbulently swaying shapes,
ham	voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in the furnaces of suffering
ham	until the touch of pity could make no mark on them.
ham	But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression was
spam	in vivid life, there were two groups of faces--each seven in number--so
ham	fixedly contrasting with the rest, that never did sea roll which bore
spam	more memorable wrecks with it. Seven faces of prisoners, suddenly
ham	released by the storm that had burst their tomb, were carried high
spam	overhead: all scared, all lost, all wondering and amazed, as if the Last
ham	Day were come, and those who rejoiced around them were lost spirits.
spam	Other seven faces there were, carried higher, seven dead faces, whose
spam	drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited the Last Day. Impassive
spam	faces, yet with a suspended--not an abolished--expression on them;
ham	faces, rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped
spam	lids of the eyes, and bear witness with the bloodless lips, "THOU DIDST
spam	IT!"
ham	Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of the
ham	accursed fortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered letters
ham	and other memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of broken
ham	hearts,--such, and such--like, the loudly echoing footsteps of Saint
ham	Antoine escort through the Paris streets in mid-July, one thousand seven
ham	hundred and eighty-nine. Now, Heaven defeat the fancy of Lucie Darnay,
spam	and keep these feet far out of her life! For, they are headlong, mad,
ham	and dangerous; and in the years so long after the breaking of the cask
ham	at Defarge's wine-shop door, they are not easily purified when once
ham	stained red.
ham	XXII. The Sea Still Rises
ham	Haggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which to soften
ham	his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he could, with
ham	the relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations, when Madame
ham	Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over the customers.
ham	Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for the great brotherhood of
ham	Spies had become, even in one short week, extremely chary of trusting
spam	themselves to the saint's mercies. The lamps across his streets had a
spam	portentously elastic swing with them.
ham	Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and heat,
spam	contemplating the wine-shop and the street. In both, there were several
spam	knots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest sense
spam	of power enthroned on their distress. The raggedest nightcap, awry on
spam	the wretchedest head, had this crooked significance in it: "I know how
ham	hard it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to support life in myself;
ham	but do you know how easy it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to
spam	destroy life in you?" Every lean bare arm, that had been without work
spam	before, had this work always ready for it now, that it could strike.
ham	The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with the experience that
ham	they could tear. There was a change in the appearance of Saint Antoine;
spam	the image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and the
spam	last finishing blows had told mightily on the expression.
ham	Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as was
spam	to be desired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women. One of her
spam	sisterhood knitted beside her. The short, rather plump wife of a starved
spam	grocer, and the mother of two children withal, this lieutenant had
spam	already earned the complimentary name of The Vengeance.
ham	"Hark!" said The Vengeance. "Listen, then! Who comes?"
ham	As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint Antoine
spam	Quarter to the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreading
spam	murmur came rushing along.
ham	"It is Defarge," said madame. "Silence, patriots!"
spam	Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked
ham	around him! "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again. "Listen to him!"
spam	Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and open
spam	mouths, formed outside the door; all those within the wine-shop had
ham	sprung to their feet.
ham	"Say then, my husband. What is it?"
ham	"News from the other world!"
spam	"How, then?" cried madame, contemptuously. "The other world?"
ham	"Does everybody here recall old Foulon, who told the famished people
spam	that they might eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?"
spam	"Everybody!" from all throats.
spam	"The news is of him. He is among us!"
ham	"Among us!" from the universal throat again. "And dead?"
ham	"Not dead! He feared us so much--and with reason--that he caused himself
ham	to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral. But they have
ham	found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought him in. I have
ham	seen him but now, on his way to the Hotel de Ville, a prisoner. I have
spam	said that he had reason to fear us. Say all! _Had_ he reason?"
ham	Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had
ham	never known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if he
ham	could have heard the answering cry.
spam	A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked
spam	steadfastly at one another. The Vengeance stooped, and the jar of a drum
ham	was heard as she moved it at her feet behind the counter.
spam	"Patriots!" said Defarge, in a determined voice, "are we ready?"
ham	Instantly Madame Defarge's knife was in her girdle; the drum was beating
spam	in the streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by magic; and
ham	The Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms about
spam	her head like all the forty Furies at once, was tearing from house to
ham	house, rousing the women.
ham	The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they looked
spam	from windows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring down into
ham	the streets; but, the women were a sight to chill the boldest. From
ham	such household occupations as their bare poverty yielded, from their
ham	children, from their aged and their sick crouching on the bare ground
ham	famished and naked, they ran out with streaming hair, urging one
spam	another, and themselves, to madness with the wildest cries and actions.
ham	Villain Foulon taken, my sister! Old Foulon taken, my mother! Miscreant
ham	Foulon taken, my daughter! Then, a score of others ran into the midst of
spam	these, beating their breasts, tearing their hair, and screaming, Foulon
ham	alive! Foulon who told the starving people they might eat grass! Foulon
spam	who told my old father that he might eat grass, when I had no bread
ham	to give him! Foulon who told my baby it might suck grass, when these
ham	breasts were dry with want! O mother of God, this Foulon! O Heaven our
ham	suffering! Hear me, my dead baby and my withered father: I swear on my
ham	knees, on these stones, to avenge you on Foulon! Husbands, and brothers,
spam	and young men, Give us the blood of Foulon, Give us the head of Foulon,
spam	Give us the heart of Foulon, Give us the body and soul of Foulon, Rend
spam	Foulon to pieces, and dig him into the ground, that grass may grow from
ham	him! With these cries, numbers of the women, lashed into blind frenzy,
spam	whirled about, striking and tearing at their own friends until they
spam	dropped into a passionate swoon, and were only saved by the men
ham	belonging to them from being trampled under foot.
spam	Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment! This Foulon was at
spam	the Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed. Never, if Saint Antoine knew
spam	his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs! Armed men and women flocked out
spam	of the Quarter so fast, and drew even these last dregs after them with
spam	such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an hour there was not
spam	a human creature in Saint Antoine's bosom but a few old crones and the
ham	wailing children.
spam	No. They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination where
spam	this old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the adjacent
ham	open space and streets. The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance,
ham	and Jacques Three, were in the first press, and at no great distance
ham	from him in the Hall.
ham	"See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife. "See the old villain bound
ham	with ropes. That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon his back.
ham	Ha, ha! That was well done. Let him eat it now!" Madame put her knife
ham	under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.
spam	The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause of
ham	her satisfaction to those behind them, and those again explaining to
ham	others, and those to others, the neighbouring streets resounded with the
spam	clapping of hands. Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl,
spam	and the winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge's frequent
ham	expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness, at
ham	a distance: the more readily, because certain men who had by some
ham	wonderful exercise of agility climbed up the external architecture
spam	to look in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted as a
ham	telegraph between her and the crowd outside the building.
ham	At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hope or
ham	protection, directly down upon the old prisoner's head. The favour was
spam	too much to bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and chaff that had
ham	stood surprisingly long, went to the winds, and Saint Antoine had got
spam	him!
ham	It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd. Defarge
ham	had but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded the miserable
spam	wretch in a deadly embrace--Madame Defarge had but followed and turned
ham	her hand in one of the ropes with which he was tied--The Vengeance and
spam	Jacques Three were not yet up with them, and the men at the windows
ham	had not yet swooped into the Hall, like birds of prey from their high
spam	perches--when the cry seemed to go up, all over the city, "Bring him
spam	out! Bring him to the lamp!"
ham	Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now, on
ham	his knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at,
ham	and stifled by the bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into his
ham	face by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet always
ham	entreating and beseeching for mercy; now full of vehement agony of
spam	action, with a small clear space about him as the people drew one
ham	another back that they might see; now, a log of dead wood drawn through
spam	a forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest street corner where one
ham	of the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame Defarge let him go--as a cat
ham	might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly looked at him
spam	while they made ready, and while he besought her: the women passionately
spam	screeching at him all the time, and the men sternly calling out to have
spam	him killed with grass in his mouth. Once, he went aloft, and the rope
ham	broke, and they caught him shrieking; twice, he went aloft, and the rope
spam	broke, and they caught him shrieking; then, the rope was merciful, and
spam	held him, and his head was soon upon a pike, with grass enough in the
spam	mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at the sight of.
ham	Nor was this the end of the day's bad work, for Saint Antoine so shouted
spam	and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on hearing when
spam	the day closed in that the son-in-law of the despatched, another of the
spam	people's enemies and insulters, was coming into Paris under a guard
ham	five hundred strong, in cavalry alone. Saint Antoine wrote his crimes
spam	on flaring sheets of paper, seized him--would have torn him out of the
spam	breast of an army to bear Foulon company--set his head and heart on
spam	pikes, and carried the three spoils of the day, in Wolf-procession
spam	through the streets.
ham	Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the children,
ham	wailing and breadless. Then, the miserable bakers' shops were beset by
ham	long files of them, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and while
spam	they waited with stomachs faint and empty, they beguiled the time by
spam	embracing one another on the triumphs of the day, and achieving them
ham	again in gossip. Gradually, these strings of ragged people shortened and
ham	frayed away; and then poor lights began to shine in high windows, and
spam	slender fires were made in the streets, at which neighbours cooked in
ham	common, afterwards supping at their doors.
ham	Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of
spam	most other sauce to wretched bread. Yet, human fellowship infused
ham	some nourishment into the flinty viands, and struck some sparks of
ham	cheerfulness out of them. Fathers and mothers who had had their full
ham	share in the worst of the day, played gently with their meagre children;
ham	and lovers, with such a world around them and before them, loved and
ham	hoped.
spam	It was almost morning, when Defarge's wine-shop parted with its last
spam	knot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in
ham	husky tones, while fastening the door:
spam	"At last it is come, my dear!"
spam	"Eh well!" returned madame. "Almost."
ham	Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept: even The Vengeance slept with
ham	her starved grocer, and the drum was at rest. The drum's was the
spam	only voice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not changed. The
ham	Vengeance, as custodian of the drum, could have wakened him up and had
ham	the same speech out of him as before the Bastille fell, or old Foulon
ham	was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men and women in Saint
spam	Antoine's bosom.
ham	XXIII. Fire Rises
ham	There was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where
ham	the mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones on the
ham	highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold his
ham	poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body together. The prison on the
spam	crag was not so dominant as of yore; there were soldiers to guard it,
spam	but not many; there were officers to guard the soldiers, but not one of
spam	them knew what his men would do--beyond this: that it would probably not
spam	be what he was ordered.
ham	Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation.
ham	Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as
ham	shrivelled and poor as the miserable people. Everything was bowed down,
spam	dejected, oppressed, and broken. Habitations, fences, domesticated
ham	animals, men, women, children, and the soil that bore them--all worn
spam	out.
spam	Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a national
ham	blessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example of
spam	luxurious and shining life, and a great deal more to equal purpose;
ham	nevertheless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or other, brought
spam	things to this. Strange that Creation, designed expressly for
spam	Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed out! There must
ham	be something short-sighted in the eternal arrangements, surely! Thus it
spam	was, however; and the last drop of blood having been extracted from the
ham	flints, and the last screw of the rack having been turned so often that
ham	its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned with nothing
spam	to bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so low and
spam	unaccountable.
spam	But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a village like
spam	it. For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it and wrung
ham	it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except for the pleasures
ham	of the chase--now, found in hunting the people; now, found in hunting
ham	the beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur made edifying spaces
ham	of barbarous and barren wilderness. No. The change consisted in
ham	the appearance of strange faces of low caste, rather than in the
spam	disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, and otherwise beautified and
spam	beautifying features of Monseigneur.
spam	For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in the
spam	dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and
spam	to dust he must return, being for the most part too much occupied in
ham	thinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eat if
ham	he had it--in these times, as he raised his eyes from his lonely labour,
spam	and viewed the prospect, he would see some rough figure approaching on
spam	foot, the like of which was once a rarity in those parts, but was now
spam	a frequent presence. As it advanced, the mender of roads would discern
ham	without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired man, of almost barbarian
spam	aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were clumsy even to the eyes of a
ham	mender of roads, grim, rough, swart, steeped in the mud and dust of many
ham	highways, dank with the marshy moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled
ham	with the thorns and leaves and moss of many byways through woods.
ham	Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather,
spam	as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as he
ham	could get from a shower of hail.
spam	The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at the mill,
spam	and at the prison on the crag. When he had identified these objects
ham	in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that was just
ham	intelligible:
spam	"How goes it, Jacques?"
ham	"All well, Jacques."
spam	"Touch then!"
ham	They joined hands, and the man sat down on the heap of stones.
spam	"No dinner?"
spam	"Nothing but supper now," said the mender of roads, with a hungry face.
ham	"It is the fashion," growled the man. "I meet no dinner anywhere."
spam	He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and
spam	steel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow: then, suddenly held
spam	it from him and dropped something into it from between his finger and
ham	thumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke.
ham	"Touch then." It was the turn of the mender of roads to say it this
ham	time, after observing these operations. They again joined hands.
spam	"To-night?" said the mender of roads.
spam	"To-night," said the man, putting the pipe in his mouth.
ham	"Where?"
ham	"Here."
spam	He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking silently at
ham	one another, with the hail driving in between them like a pigmy charge
ham	of bayonets, until the sky began to clear over the village.
spam	"Show me!" said the traveller then, moving to the brow of the hill.
ham	"See!" returned the mender of roads, with extended finger. "You go down
ham	here, and straight through the street, and past the fountain--"
spam	"To the Devil with all that!" interrupted the other, rolling his eye
ham	over the landscape. "_I_ go through no streets and past no fountains.
ham	Well?"
spam	"Well! About two leagues beyond the summit of that hill above the
ham	village."
ham	"Good. When do you cease to work?"
ham	"At sunset."
spam	"Will you wake me, before departing? I have walked two nights without
spam	resting. Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child. Will you
ham	wake me?"
spam	"Surely."
spam	The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped off his
spam	great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of stones. He
spam	was fast asleep directly.
ham	As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds, rolling
ham	away, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded to
spam	by silver gleams upon the landscape, the little man (who wore a red cap
ham	now, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated by the figure on the
spam	heap of stones. His eyes were so often turned towards it, that he used
ham	his tools mechanically, and, one would have said, to very poor account.
ham	The bronze face, the shaggy black hair and beard, the coarse woollen
ham	red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun stuff and hairy skins of
spam	beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and the sullen
spam	and desperate compression of the lips in sleep, inspired the mender
spam	of roads with awe. The traveller had travelled far, and his feet were
ham	footsore, and his ankles chafed and bleeding; his great shoes, stuffed
ham	with leaves and grass, had been heavy to drag over the many long
ham	leagues, and his clothes were chafed into holes, as he himself was into
spam	sores. Stooping down beside him, the road-mender tried to get a peep at
ham	secret weapons in his breast or where not; but, in vain, for he slept
ham	with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutely as his lips.
spam	Fortified towns with their stockades, guard-houses, gates, trenches, and
ham	drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much air as against
spam	this figure. And when he lifted his eyes from it to the horizon and
ham	looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures, stopped by no
spam	obstacle, tending to centres all over France.
spam	The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of
ham	brightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the paltering lumps
ham	of dull ice on his body and the diamonds into which the sun changed
ham	them, until the sun was low in the west, and the sky was glowing. Then,
ham	the mender of roads having got his tools together and all things ready
spam	to go down into the village, roused him.
ham	"Good!" said the sleeper, rising on his elbow. "Two leagues beyond the
spam	summit of the hill?"
ham	"About."
ham	"About. Good!"
spam	The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before him
ham	according to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain,
ham	squeezing himself in among the lean kine brought there to drink, and
ham	appearing even to whisper to them in his whispering to all the village.
spam	When the village had taken its poor supper, it did not creep to bed,
spam	as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and remained there. A
ham	curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when it gathered
ham	together at the fountain in the dark, another curious contagion of
ham	looking expectantly at the sky in one direction only. Monsieur Gabelle,
spam	chief functionary of the place, became uneasy; went out on his house-top
ham	alone, and looked in that direction too; glanced down from behind his
spam	chimneys at the darkening faces by the fountain below, and sent word to
ham	the sacristan who kept the keys of the church, that there might be need
ham	to ring the tocsin by-and-bye.
ham	The night deepened. The trees environing the old chateau, keeping its
spam	solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though they threatened
spam	the pile of building massive and dark in the gloom. Up the two terrace
spam	flights of steps the rain ran wildly, and beat at the great door, like a
spam	swift messenger rousing those within; uneasy rushes of wind went through
ham	the hall, among the old spears and knives, and passed lamenting up the
spam	stairs, and shook the curtains of the bed where the last Marquis
spam	had slept. East, West, North, and South, through the woods, four
ham	heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the high grass and cracked the
ham	branches, striding on cautiously to come together in the courtyard. Four
spam	lights broke out there, and moved away in different directions, and all
ham	was black again.
spam	But, not for long. Presently, the chateau began to make itself strangely
spam	visible by some light of its own, as though it were growing luminous.
ham	Then, a flickering streak played behind the architecture of the front,
spam	picking out transparent places, and showing where balustrades, arches,
ham	and windows were. Then it soared higher, and grew broader and brighter.
ham	Soon, from a score of the great windows, flames burst forth, and the
spam	stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.
spam	A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were left
ham	there, and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away. There was
spam	spurring and splashing through the darkness, and bridle was drawn in the
ham	space by the village fountain, and the horse in a foam stood at Monsieur
spam	Gabelle's door. "Help, Gabelle! Help, every one!" The tocsin rang
ham	impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there was none. The
spam	mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particular friends, stood
ham	with folded arms at the fountain, looking at the pillar of fire in the
spam	sky. "It must be forty feet high," said they, grimly; and never moved.
spam	The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered away
spam	through the village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the prison on
spam	the crag. At the gate, a group of officers were looking at the fire;
spam	removed from them, a group of soldiers. "Help, gentlemen--officers! The
spam	chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved from the flames by
spam	timely aid! Help, help!" The officers looked towards the soldiers who
spam	looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered, with shrugs and biting
ham	of lips, "It must burn."
ham	As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, the
spam	village was illuminating. The mender of roads, and the two hundred and
ham	fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by the idea of
ham	lighting up, had darted into their houses, and were putting candles in
spam	every dull little pane of glass. The general scarcity of everything,
spam	occasioned candles to be borrowed in a rather peremptory manner of
spam	Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation on
ham	that functionary's part, the mender of roads, once so submissive to
spam	authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires with,
ham	and that post-horses would roast.
spam	The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn. In the roaring and
spam	raging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from the
ham	infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away. With the rising
spam	and falling of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they were in
spam	torment. When great masses of stone and timber fell, the face with the
spam	two dints in the nose became obscured: anon struggled out of the smoke
ham	again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis, burning at the stake
spam	and contending with the fire.
spam	The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire,
spam	scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fierce
spam	figures, begirt the blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke. Molten
ham	lead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain; the water ran
spam	dry; the extinguisher tops of the towers vanished like ice before the
spam	heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame. Great rents and
spam	splits branched out in the solid walls, like crystallisation; stupefied
spam	birds wheeled about and dropped into the furnace; four fierce figures
spam	trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along the night-enshrouded
spam	roads, guided by the beacon they had lighted, towards their next
ham	destination. The illuminated village had seized hold of the tocsin, and,
ham	abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for joy.
ham	Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire, and
ham	bell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to do with
spam	the collection of rent and taxes--though it was but a small instalment
spam	of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those latter
spam	days--became impatient for an interview with him, and, surrounding his
ham	house, summoned him to come forth for personal conference. Whereupon,
spam	Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door, and retire to hold counsel
ham	with himself. The result of that conference was, that Gabelle again
ham	withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack of chimneys; this time
spam	resolved, if his door were broken in (he was a small Southern man
spam	of retaliative temperament), to pitch himself head foremost over the
spam	parapet, and crush a man or two below.
spam	Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the
ham	distant chateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door,
ham	combined with the joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having an
spam	ill-omened lamp slung across the road before his posting-house gate,
ham	which the village showed a lively inclination to displace in his favour.
ham	A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on the brink of
ham	the black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which Monsieur
ham	Gabelle had resolved! But, the friendly dawn appearing at last, and the
spam	rush-candles of the village guttering out, the people happily dispersed,
ham	and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with him for that
spam	while.
spam	Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there were
ham	other functionaries less fortunate, that night and other nights, whom
ham	the rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful streets, where they
ham	had been born and bred; also, there were other villagers and townspeople
spam	less fortunate than the mender of roads and his fellows, upon whom the
spam	functionaries and soldiery turned with success, and whom they strung up
ham	in their turn. But, the fierce figures were steadily wending East, West,
spam	North, and South, be that as it would; and whosoever hung, fire burned.
spam	The altitude of the gallows that would turn to water and quench it,
spam	no functionary, by any stretch of mathematics, was able to calculate
spam	successfully.
spam	XXIV. Drawn to the Loadstone Rock
ham	In such risings of fire and risings of sea--the firm earth shaken by
spam	the rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on the
ham	flow, higher and higher, to the terror and wonder of the beholders on
spam	the shore--three years of tempest were consumed. Three more birthdays
spam	of little Lucie had been woven by the golden thread into the peaceful
ham	tissue of the life of her home.
ham	Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes in
spam	the corner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the thronging
spam	feet. For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the footsteps of
ham	a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with their country declared in
ham	danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible enchantment long persisted
spam	in.
ham	Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenon of
spam	his not being appreciated: of his being so little wanted in France, as
spam	to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal from it, and
spam	this life together. Like the fabled rustic who raised the Devil with
spam	infinite pains, and was so terrified at the sight of him that he could
spam	ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur, after
ham	boldly reading the Lord's Prayer backwards for a great number of years,
spam	and performing many other potent spells for compelling the Evil One, no
ham	sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took to his noble heels.
ham	The shining Bull's Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have been the
ham	mark for a hurricane of national bullets. It had never been a good
spam	eye to see with--had long had the mote in it of Lucifer's pride,
spam	Sardanapalus's luxury, and a mole's blindness--but it had dropped
ham	out and was gone. The Court, from that exclusive inner circle to its
ham	outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, was
ham	all gone together. Royalty was gone; had been besieged in its Palace and
ham	"suspended," when the last tidings came over.
ham	The August of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two was
ham	come, and Monseigneur was by this time scattered far and wide.
ham	As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place of
ham	Monseigneur, in London, was Tellson's Bank. Spirits are supposed to
ham	haunt the places where their bodies most resorted, and Monseigneur
spam	without a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be.
ham	Moreover, it was the spot to which such French intelligence as was most
spam	to be relied upon, came quickest. Again: Tellson's was a munificent
spam	house, and extended great liberality to old customers who had fallen
ham	from their high estate. Again: those nobles who had seen the coming
ham	storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation, had made
spam	provident remittances to Tellson's, were always to be heard of there
spam	by their needy brethren. To which it must be added that every new-comer
ham	from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson's, almost as
ham	a matter of course. For such variety of reasons, Tellson's was at that
ham	time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange; and this
ham	was so well known to the public, and the inquiries made there were in
ham	consequence so numerous, that Tellson's sometimes wrote the latest news
spam	out in a line or so and posted it in the Bank windows, for all who ran
spam	through Temple Bar to read.
spam	On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and Charles
spam	Darnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice. The
ham	penitential den once set apart for interviews with the House, was now
ham	the news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing. It was within half an
spam	hour or so of the time of closing.
ham	"But, although you are the youngest man that ever lived," said Charles
spam	Darnay, rather hesitating, "I must still suggest to you--"
spam	"I understand. That I am too old?" said Mr. Lorry.
spam	"Unsettled weather, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, a
spam	disorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you."
spam	"My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "you touch
spam	some of the reasons for my going: not for my staying away. It is safe
spam	enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an old fellow of hard
ham	upon fourscore when there are so many people there much better worth
ham	interfering with. As to its being a disorganised city, if it were not a
ham	disorganised city there would be no occasion to send somebody from our
ham	House here to our House there, who knows the city and the business, of
spam	old, and is in Tellson's confidence. As to the uncertain travelling, the
ham	long journey, and the winter weather, if I were not prepared to submit
spam	myself to a few inconveniences for the sake of Tellson's, after all
ham	these years, who ought to be?"
ham	"I wish I were going myself," said Charles Darnay, somewhat restlessly,
spam	and like one thinking aloud.
spam	"Indeed! You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!" exclaimed Mr.
spam	Lorry. "You wish you were going yourself? And you a Frenchman born? You
ham	are a wise counsellor."
spam	"My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that the
spam	thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed through
ham	my mind often. One cannot help thinking, having had some sympathy for
spam	the miserable people, and having abandoned something to them," he spoke
ham	here in his former thoughtful manner, "that one might be listened to,
spam	and might have the power to persuade to some restraint. Only last night,
ham	after you had left us, when I was talking to Lucie--"
ham	"When you were talking to Lucie," Mr. Lorry repeated. "Yes. I wonder you
ham	are not ashamed to mention the name of Lucie! Wishing you were going to
spam	France at this time of day!"
ham	"However, I am not going," said Charles Darnay, with a smile. "It is
spam	more to the purpose that you say you are."
spam	"And I am, in plain reality. The truth is, my dear Charles," Mr. Lorry
ham	glanced at the distant House, and lowered his voice, "you can have no
ham	conception of the difficulty with which our business is transacted, and
spam	of the peril in which our books and papers over yonder are involved. The
ham	Lord above knows what the compromising consequences would be to numbers
ham	of people, if some of our documents were seized or destroyed; and they
spam	might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Paris is not set
spam	afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow! Now, a judicious selection from these
spam	with the least possible delay, and the burying of them, or otherwise
ham	getting of them out of harm's way, is within the power (without loss of
spam	precious time) of scarcely any one but myself, if any one. And shall
ham	I hang back, when Tellson's knows this and says this--Tellson's, whose
ham	bread I have eaten these sixty years--because I am a little stiff about
ham	the joints? Why, I am a boy, sir, to half a dozen old codgers here!"
spam	"How I admire the gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry."
ham	"Tut! Nonsense, sir!--And, my dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, glancing at
spam	the House again, "you are to remember, that getting things out of
spam	Paris at this present time, no matter what things, is next to an
ham	impossibility. Papers and precious matters were this very day brought
spam	to us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not business-like to
ham	whisper it, even to you), by the strangest bearers you can imagine,
spam	every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single hair as he passed
spam	the Barriers. At another time, our parcels would come and go, as easily
ham	as in business-like Old England; but now, everything is stopped."
ham	"And do you really go to-night?"
spam	"I really go to-night, for the case has become too pressing to admit of
spam	delay."
spam	"And do you take no one with you?"
ham	"All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have nothing
ham	to say to any of them. I intend to take Jerry. Jerry has been my
ham	bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am used to him.
spam	Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English bull-dog, or
spam	of having any design in his head but to fly at anybody who touches his
ham	master."
spam	"I must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry and
ham	youthfulness."
ham	"I must say again, nonsense, nonsense! When I have executed this little
ham	commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson's proposal to retire and
ham	live at my ease. Time enough, then, to think about growing old."
spam	This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry's usual desk, with
ham	Monseigneur swarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he
ham	would do to avenge himself on the rascal-people before long. It was too
ham	much the way of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and it
spam	was much too much the way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of this
ham	terrible Revolution as if it were the only harvest ever known under
spam	the skies that had not been sown--as if nothing had ever been done, or
ham	omitted to be done, that had led to it--as if observers of the wretched
ham	millions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources that
ham	should have made them prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming,
ham	years before, and had not in plain words recorded what they saw. Such
spam	vapouring, combined with the extravagant plots of Monseigneur for the
ham	restoration of a state of things that had utterly exhausted itself,
spam	and worn out Heaven and earth as well as itself, was hard to be endured
spam	without some remonstrance by any sane man who knew the truth. And it was
ham	such vapouring all about his ears, like a troublesome confusion of blood
ham	in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness in his mind, which had
ham	already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.
spam	Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the King's Bench Bar, far on his
ham	way to state promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme: broaching
spam	to Monseigneur, his devices for blowing the people up and exterminating
ham	them from the face of the earth, and doing without them: and for
spam	accomplishing many similar objects akin in their nature to the abolition
spam	of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tails of the race. Him, Darnay heard
ham	with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnay stood divided between
ham	going away that he might hear no more, and remaining to interpose his
spam	word, when the thing that was to be, went on to shape itself out.
spam	The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened letter
spam	before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of the person to
spam	whom it was addressed? The House laid the letter down so close to Darnay
ham	that he saw the direction--the more quickly because it was his own right
spam	name. The address, turned into English, ran:
spam	"Very pressing. To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evremonde, of
spam	France. Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers,
spam	London, England."
spam	On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgent and
spam	express request to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this name should
spam	be--unless he, the Doctor, dissolved the obligation--kept inviolate
spam	between them. Nobody else knew it to be his name; his own wife had no
spam	suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry could have none.
ham	"No," said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; "I have referred it,
ham	I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where this
ham	gentleman is to be found."
spam	The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank, there
ham	was a general set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorry's desk. He
ham	held the letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at it, in the
ham	person of this plotting and indignant refugee; and Monseigneur looked at
ham	it in the person of that plotting and indignant refugee; and This, That,
spam	and The Other, all had something disparaging to say, in French or in
spam	English, concerning the Marquis who was not to be found.
ham	"Nephew, I believe--but in any case degenerate successor--of the
spam	polished Marquis who was murdered," said one. "Happy to say, I never
ham	knew him."
spam	"A craven who abandoned his post," said another--this Monseigneur had
ham	been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a load of
spam	hay--"some years ago."
spam	"Infected with the new doctrines," said a third, eyeing the direction
spam	through his glass in passing; "set himself in opposition to the last
ham	Marquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and left them to
ham	the ruffian herd. They will recompense him now, I hope, as he deserves."
spam	"Hey?" cried the blatant Stryver. "Did he though? Is that the sort of
ham	fellow? Let us look at his infamous name. D--n the fellow!"
ham	Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver on
ham	the shoulder, and said:
spam	"I know the fellow."
ham	"Do you, by Jupiter?" said Stryver. "I am sorry for it."
spam	"Why?"
ham	"Why, Mr. Darnay? D'ye hear what he did? Don't ask, why, in these
ham	times."
ham	"But I do ask why?"
spam	"Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it. I am sorry to
ham	hear you putting any such extraordinary questions. Here is a fellow,
ham	who, infected by the most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry that
spam	ever was known, abandoned his property to the vilest scum of the earth
ham	that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I am sorry that a
spam	man who instructs youth knows him? Well, but I'll answer you. I am sorry
spam	because I believe there is contamination in such a scoundrel. That's
spam	why."
ham	Mindful of the secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself, and
ham	said: "You may not understand the gentleman."
spam	"I understand how to put _you_ in a corner, Mr. Darnay," said Bully
ham	Stryver, "and I'll do it. If this fellow is a gentleman, I _don't_
spam	understand him. You may tell him so, with my compliments. You may also
spam	tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods and position
spam	to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at the head of them. But, no,
spam	gentlemen," said Stryver, looking all round, and snapping his fingers,
ham	"I know something of human nature, and I tell you that you'll never
spam	find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to the mercies of such
ham	precious _protgs_. No, gentlemen; he'll always show 'em a clean pair
ham	of heels very early in the scuffle, and sneak away."
spam	With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver
ham	shouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbation of
ham	his hearers. Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the desk,
ham	in the general departure from the Bank.
ham	"Will you take charge of the letter?" said Mr. Lorry. "You know where to
spam	deliver it?"
ham	"I do."
spam	"Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been
ham	addressed here, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it, and
ham	that it has been here some time?"
spam	"I will do so. Do you start for Paris from here?"
spam	"From here, at eight."
ham	"I will come back, to see you off."
ham	Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other men,
spam	Darnay made the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple, opened the
ham	letter, and read it. These were its contents:
spam	"Prison of the Abbaye, Paris.
ham	"June 21, 1792. "MONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS.
ham	"After having long been in danger of my life at the hands of the
spam	village, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, and
spam	brought a long journey on foot to Paris. On the road I have suffered a
ham	great deal. Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed--razed to the
ham	ground.
spam	"The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,
ham	and for which I shall be summoned before the tribunal, and shall lose my
ham	life (without your so generous help), is, they tell me, treason against
ham	the majesty of the people, in that I have acted against them for an
ham	emigrant. It is in vain I represent that I have acted for them, and not
spam	against, according to your commands. It is in vain I represent that,
spam	before the sequestration of emigrant property, I had remitted the
spam	imposts they had ceased to pay; that I had collected no rent; that I had
ham	had recourse to no process. The only response is, that I have acted for
ham	an emigrant, and where is that emigrant?
ham	"Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is that
spam	emigrant? I cry in my sleep where is he? I demand of Heaven, will he
spam	not come to deliver me? No answer. Ah Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,
ham	I send my desolate cry across the sea, hoping it may perhaps reach your
ham	ears through the great bank of Tilson known at Paris!
spam	"For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of
ham	your noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, to
spam	succour and release me. My fault is, that I have been true to you. Oh
spam	Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!
ham	"From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer and
ham	nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, the
ham	assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service.
spam	"Your afflicted,
ham	"Gabelle."
spam	The latent uneasiness in Darnay's mind was roused to vigourous life
spam	by this letter. The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose
spam	only crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him so
ham	reproachfully in the face, that, as he walked to and fro in the Temple
spam	considering what to do, he almost hid his face from the passersby.
ham	He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had culminated
ham	the bad deeds and bad reputation of the old family house, in his
spam	resentful suspicions of his uncle, and in the aversion with which his
ham	conscience regarded the crumbling fabric that he was supposed to uphold,
ham	he had acted imperfectly. He knew very well, that in his love for Lucie,
spam	his renunciation of his social place, though by no means new to his own
spam	mind, had been hurried and incomplete. He knew that he ought to have
ham	systematically worked it out and supervised it, and that he had meant to
spam	do it, and that it had never been done.
ham	The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of being
ham	always actively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the time
spam	which had followed on one another so fast, that the events of this week
ham	annihilated the immature plans of last week, and the events of the week
ham	following made all new again; he knew very well, that to the force of
spam	these circumstances he had yielded:--not without disquiet, but still
spam	without continuous and accumulating resistance. That he had watched
ham	the times for a time of action, and that they had shifted and struggled
ham	until the time had gone by, and the nobility were trooping from
spam	France by every highway and byway, and their property was in course of
spam	confiscation and destruction, and their very names were blotting out,
spam	was as well known to himself as it could be to any new authority in
spam	France that might impeach him for it.
ham	But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so
ham	far from having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had
spam	relinquished them of his own will, thrown himself on a world with no
ham	favour in it, won his own private place there, and earned his own
ham	bread. Monsieur Gabelle had held the impoverished and involved estate
spam	on written instructions, to spare the people, to give them what little
ham	there was to give--such fuel as the heavy creditors would let them have
spam	in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from the same grip in
ham	the summer--and no doubt he had put the fact in plea and proof, for his
ham	own safety, so that it could not but appear now.
ham	This favoured the desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to make,
ham	that he would go to Paris.
ham	Yes. Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams had driven
spam	him within the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it was drawing him
spam	to itself, and he must go. Everything that arose before his mind drifted
ham	him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily, to the terrible
ham	attraction. His latent uneasiness had been, that bad aims were being
ham	worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments, and that he who
ham	could not fail to know that he was better than they, was not there,
ham	trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assert the claims of mercy
spam	and humanity. With this uneasiness half stifled, and half reproaching
ham	him, he had been brought to the pointed comparison of himself with the
ham	brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong; upon that comparison
ham	(injurious to himself) had instantly followed the sneers of Monseigneur,
ham	which had stung him bitterly, and those of Stryver, which above all were
spam	coarse and galling, for old reasons. Upon those, had followed Gabelle's
spam	letter: the appeal of an innocent prisoner, in danger of death, to his
ham	justice, honour, and good name.
ham	His resolution was made. He must go to Paris.
ham	Yes. The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, until he
spam	struck. He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger. The intention
spam	with which he had done what he had done, even although he had left
spam	it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect that would be
spam	gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himself to assert
ham	it. Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is so often the
ham	sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him, and he even
ham	saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guide this raging
spam	Revolution that was running so fearfully wild.
spam	As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that
ham	neither Lucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone.
ham	Lucie should be spared the pain of separation; and her father, always
spam	reluctant to turn his thoughts towards the dangerous ground of old,
ham	should come to the knowledge of the step, as a step taken, and not in
ham	the balance of suspense and doubt. How much of the incompleteness of his
ham	situation was referable to her father, through the painful anxiety
spam	to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, he did not
spam	discuss with himself. But, that circumstance too, had had its influence
ham	in his course.
ham	He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time to
spam	return to Tellson's and take leave of Mr. Lorry. As soon as he arrived
spam	in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but he must say
ham	nothing of his intention now.
spam	A carriage with post-horses was ready at the Bank door, and Jerry was
spam	booted and equipped.
spam	"I have delivered that letter," said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry. "I
ham	would not consent to your being charged with any written answer, but
spam	perhaps you will take a verbal one?"
ham	"That I will, and readily," said Mr. Lorry, "if it is not dangerous."
ham	"Not at all. Though it is to a prisoner in the Abbaye."
spam	"What is his name?" said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in his
ham	hand.
spam	"Gabelle."
ham	"Gabelle. And what is the message to the unfortunate Gabelle in prison?"
ham	"Simply, 'that he has received the letter, and will come.'"
ham	"Any time mentioned?"
ham	"He will start upon his journey to-morrow night."
ham	"Any person mentioned?"
ham	"No."
spam	He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks,
ham	and went out with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, into the
ham	misty air of Fleet-street. "My love to Lucie, and to little Lucie," said
ham	Mr. Lorry at parting, "and take precious care of them till I come back."
spam	Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully smiled, as the carriage
ham	rolled away.
spam	That night--it was the fourteenth of August--he sat up late, and wrote
spam	two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strong obligation
ham	he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length, the reasons
ham	that he had, for feeling confident that he could become involved in no
ham	personal danger there; the other was to the Doctor, confiding Lucie and
spam	their dear child to his care, and dwelling on the same topics with the
ham	strongest assurances. To both, he wrote that he would despatch letters
ham	in proof of his safety, immediately after his arrival.
spam	It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the first
spam	reservation of their joint lives on his mind. It was a hard matter to
spam	preserve the innocent deceit of which they were profoundly unsuspicious.
spam	But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy and busy, made him
ham	resolute not to tell her what impended (he had been half moved to do it,
spam	so strange it was to him to act in anything without her quiet aid), and
spam	the day passed quickly. Early in the evening he embraced her, and her
spam	scarcely less dear namesake, pretending that he would return by-and-bye
spam	(an imaginary engagement took him out, and he had secreted a valise
ham	of clothes ready), and so he emerged into the heavy mist of the heavy
spam	streets, with a heavier heart.
ham	The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all the tides
ham	and winds were setting straight and strong towards it. He left his
spam	two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour before
spam	midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began his journey.
ham	"For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of
ham	your noble name!" was the poor prisoner's cry with which he strengthened
ham	his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear on earth behind him, and
ham	floated away for the Loadstone Rock.
ham	The end of the second book.
ham	Book the Third--the Track of a Storm
ham	I. In Secret
ham	The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from
ham	England in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred and
spam	ninety-two. More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad
spam	horses, he would have encountered to delay him, though the fallen and
spam	unfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in all his glory;
spam	but, the changed times were fraught with other obstacles than
spam	these. Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band of
spam	citizen-patriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state
ham	of readiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned them,
ham	inspected their papers, looked for their names in lists of their own,
spam	turned them back, or sent them on, or stopped them and laid them in
spam	hold, as their capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for the dawning
ham	Republic One and Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or
spam	Death.
ham	A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when Charles
ham	Darnay began to perceive that for him along these country roads there
ham	was no hope of return until he should have been declared a good citizen
spam	at Paris. Whatever might befall now, he must on to his journey's end.
ham	Not a mean village closed upon him, not a common barrier dropped across
spam	the road behind him, but he knew it to be another iron door in
ham	the series that was barred between him and England. The universal
ham	watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he had been taken in a net,
spam	or were being forwarded to his destination in a cage, he could not have
spam	felt his freedom more completely gone.
spam	This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway twenty
spam	times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a day, by
spam	riding after him and taking him back, riding before him and stopping him
ham	by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him in charge. He had been
spam	days upon his journey in France alone, when he went to bed tired out, in
spam	a little town on the high road, still a long way from Paris.
spam	Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle's letter from his
ham	prison of the Abbaye would have got him on so far. His difficulty at the
spam	guard-house in this small place had been such, that he felt his journey
ham	to have come to a crisis. And he was, therefore, as little surprised as
spam	a man could be, to find himself awakened at the small inn to which he
spam	had been remitted until morning, in the middle of the night.
spam	Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in rough
spam	red caps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the bed.
ham	"Emigrant," said the functionary, "I am going to send you on to Paris,
spam	under an escort."
ham	"Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could
ham	dispense with the escort."
spam	"Silence!" growled a red-cap, striking at the coverlet with the butt-end
ham	of his musket. "Peace, aristocrat!"
ham	"It is as the good patriot says," observed the timid functionary. "You
spam	are an aristocrat, and must have an escort--and must pay for it."
ham	"I have no choice," said Charles Darnay.
ham	"Choice! Listen to him!" cried the same scowling red-cap. "As if it was
ham	not a favour to be protected from the lamp-iron!"
ham	"It is always as the good patriot says," observed the functionary. "Rise
ham	and dress yourself, emigrant."
ham	Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where other
spam	patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by
spam	a watch-fire. Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he
spam	started with it on the wet, wet roads at three o'clock in the morning.
ham	The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured
spam	cockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on either
spam	side of him.
spam	The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to
spam	his bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded round his
spam	wrist. In this state they set forth with the sharp rain driving in their
spam	faces: clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over the uneven town pavement,
ham	and out upon the mire-deep roads. In this state they traversed without
spam	change, except of horses and pace, all the mire-deep leagues that lay
ham	between them and the capital.
ham	They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak, and
spam	lying by until the twilight fell. The escort were so wretchedly clothed,
spam	that they twisted straw round their bare legs, and thatched their ragged
ham	shoulders to keep the wet off. Apart from the personal discomfort of
spam	being so attended, and apart from such considerations of present danger
spam	as arose from one of the patriots being chronically drunk, and carrying
ham	his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnay did not allow the restraint
spam	that was laid upon him to awaken any serious fears in his breast; for,
spam	he reasoned with himself that it could have no reference to the merits
spam	of an individual case that was not yet stated, and of representations,
spam	confirmable by the prisoner in the Abbaye, that were not yet made.
spam	But when they came to the town of Beauvais--which they did at eventide,
ham	when the streets were filled with people--he could not conceal from
ham	himself that the aspect of affairs was very alarming. An ominous crowd
ham	gathered to see him dismount of the posting-yard, and many voices called
spam	out loudly, "Down with the emigrant!"
spam	He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and,
spam	resuming it as his safest place, said:
ham	"Emigrant, my friends! Do you not see me here, in France, of my own
spam	will?"
spam	"You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in a
spam	furious manner through the press, hammer in hand; "and you are a cursed
spam	aristocrat!"
ham	The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider's
ham	bridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said, "Let him
ham	be; let him be! He will be judged at Paris."
spam	"Judged!" repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer. "Ay! and condemned
ham	as a traitor." At this the crowd roared approval.
spam	Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to the
ham	yard (the drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on, with
ham	the line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make his
ham	voice heard:
ham	"Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived. I am not a
spam	traitor."
ham	"He lies!" cried the smith. "He is a traitor since the decree. His life
spam	is forfeit to the people. His cursed life is not his own!"
spam	At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd, which
spam	another instant would have brought upon him, the postmaster turned his
spam	horse into the yard, the escort rode in close upon his horse's flanks,
ham	and the postmaster shut and barred the crazy double gates. The farrier
spam	struck a blow upon them with his hammer, and the crowd groaned; but, no
ham	more was done.
ham	"What is this decree that the smith spoke of?" Darnay asked the
spam	postmaster, when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard.
spam	"Truly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants."
ham	"When passed?"
spam	"On the fourteenth."
spam	"The day I left England!"
spam	"Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be
ham	others--if there are not already--banishing all emigrants, and
spam	condemning all to death who return. That is what he meant when he said
ham	your life was not your own."
spam	"But there are no such decrees yet?"
ham	"What do I know!" said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders; "there
spam	may be, or there will be. It is all the same. What would you have?"
spam	They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night, and
ham	then rode forward again when all the town was asleep. Among the many
ham	wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wild ride
ham	unreal, not the least was the seeming rarity of sleep. After long and
ham	lonely spurring over dreary roads, they would come to a cluster of poor
ham	cottages, not steeped in darkness, but all glittering with lights, and
spam	would find the people, in a ghostly manner in the dead of the night,
spam	circling hand in hand round a shrivelled tree of Liberty, or all drawn
spam	up together singing a Liberty song. Happily, however, there was sleep in
spam	Beauvais that night to help them out of it and they passed on once more
spam	into solitude and loneliness: jingling through the untimely cold and
spam	wet, among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earth
ham	that year, diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, and by
spam	the sudden emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across their
spam	way, of patriot patrols on the watch on all the roads.
ham	Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris. The barrier was
ham	closed and strongly guarded when they rode up to it.
ham	"Where are the papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolute-looking man
spam	in authority, who was summoned out by the guard.
ham	Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested the
ham	speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French citizen,
spam	in charge of an escort which the disturbed state of the country had
spam	imposed upon him, and which he had paid for.
ham	"Where," repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of him
ham	whatever, "are the papers of this prisoner?"
ham	The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them. Casting his
ham	eyes over Gabelle's letter, the same personage in authority showed some
ham	disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.
spam	He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went
spam	into the guard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside the
spam	gate. Looking about him while in this state of suspense, Charles
ham	Darnay observed that the gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiers and
spam	patriots, the latter far outnumbering the former; and that while ingress
ham	into the city for peasants' carts bringing in supplies, and for similar
ham	traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, even for the homeliest
ham	people, was very difficult. A numerous medley of men and women, not
ham	to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts, was waiting to issue
ham	forth; but, the previous identification was so strict, that they
ham	filtered through the barrier very slowly. Some of these people knew
spam	their turn for examination to be so far off, that they lay down on the
ham	ground to sleep or smoke, while others talked together, or loitered
spam	about. The red cap and tri-colour cockade were universal, both among men
ham	and women.
ham	When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of these
spam	things, Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority,
spam	who directed the guard to open the barrier. Then he delivered to the
spam	escort, drunk and sober, a receipt for the escorted, and requested him
spam	to dismount. He did so, and the two patriots, leading his tired horse,
ham	turned and rode away without entering the city.
ham	He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common wine
ham	and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and awake,
spam	drunk and sober, and in various neutral states between sleeping and
spam	waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing and lying about. The
spam	light in the guard-house, half derived from the waning oil-lamps of
ham	the night, and half from the overcast day, was in a correspondingly
spam	uncertain condition. Some registers were lying open on a desk, and an
spam	officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided over these.
ham	"Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a slip of
ham	paper to write on. "Is this the emigrant Evremonde?"
spam	"This is the man."
spam	"Your age, Evremonde?"
ham	"Thirty-seven."
ham	"Married, Evremonde?"
ham	"Yes."
spam	"Where married?"
ham	"In England."
spam	"Without doubt. Where is your wife, Evremonde?"
spam	"In England."
ham	"Without doubt. You are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of La
ham	Force."
ham	"Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay. "Under what law, and for what offence?"
spam	The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.
spam	"We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here." He
spam	said it with a hard smile, and went on writing.
ham	"I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response
ham	to that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you. I
ham	demand no more than the opportunity to do so without delay. Is not that
spam	my right?"
spam	"Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was the stolid reply. The officer
ham	wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what he had written,
spam	sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words "In secret."
spam	Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he must accompany
ham	him. The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed patriots attended
spam	them.
spam	"Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the
ham	guardhouse steps and turned into Paris, "who married the daughter of
ham	Doctor Manette, once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?"
ham	"Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.
ham	"My name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in the Quarter Saint
ham	Antoine. Possibly you have heard of me."
ham	"My wife came to your house to reclaim her father? Yes!"
spam	The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge, to say
spam	with sudden impatience, "In the name of that sharp female newly-born,
ham	and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?"
ham	"You heard me say why, a minute ago. Do you not believe it is the
ham	truth?"
ham	"A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows, and
spam	looking straight before him.
ham	"Indeed I am lost here. All here is so unprecedented, so changed, so
ham	sudden and unfair, that I am absolutely lost. Will you render me a
ham	little help?"
spam	"None." Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.
spam	"Will you answer me a single question?"
ham	"Perhaps. According to its nature. You can say what it is."
ham	"In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some free
spam	communication with the world outside?"
spam	"You will see."
spam	"I am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means of
ham	presenting my case?"
ham	"You will see. But, what then? Other people have been similarly buried
ham	in worse prisons, before now."
spam	"But never by me, Citizen Defarge."
spam	Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady
spam	and set silence. The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainter hope
ham	there was--or so Darnay thought--of his softening in any slight degree.
spam	He, therefore, made haste to say:
spam	"It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better
ham	than I, of how much importance), that I should be able to communicate to
ham	Mr. Lorry of Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who is now in Paris,
spam	the simple fact, without comment, that I have been thrown into the
ham	prison of La Force. Will you cause that to be done for me?"
ham	"I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you. My duty is to
spam	my country and the People. I am the sworn servant of both, against you.
spam	I will do nothing for you."
ham	Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pride
ham	was touched besides. As they walked on in silence, he could not but see
spam	how used the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passing along the
ham	streets. The very children scarcely noticed him. A few passers turned
ham	their heads, and a few shook their fingers at him as an aristocrat;
spam	otherwise, that a man in good clothes should be going to prison, was no
spam	more remarkable than that a labourer in working clothes should be
ham	going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty street through which they
spam	passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool, was addressing an excited
spam	audience on the crimes against the people, of the king and the royal
spam	family. The few words that he caught from this man's lips, first made
ham	it known to Charles Darnay that the king was in prison, and that the
spam	foreign ambassadors had one and all left Paris. On the road (except at
ham	Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing. The escort and the universal
spam	watchfulness had completely isolated him.
ham	That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had
spam	developed themselves when he left England, he of course knew now. That
spam	perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken faster and faster
ham	yet, he of course knew now. He could not but admit to himself that he
ham	might not have made this journey, if he could have foreseen the events
ham	of a few days. And yet his misgivings were not so dark as, imagined by
spam	the light of this later time, they would appear. Troubled as the future
spam	was, it was the unknown future, and in its obscurity there was ignorant
spam	hope. The horrible massacre, days and nights long, which, within a few
spam	rounds of the clock, was to set a great mark of blood upon the blessed
ham	garnering time of harvest, was as far out of his knowledge as if it had
spam	been a hundred thousand years away. The "sharp female newly-born, and
ham	called La Guillotine," was hardly known to him, or to the generality
spam	of people, by name. The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were
spam	probably unimagined at that time in the brains of the doers. How could
ham	they have a place in the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?
ham	Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel separation
spam	from his wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood, or the
ham	certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly. With this on
ham	his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prison courtyard, he
spam	arrived at the prison of La Force.
ham	A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom Defarge
spam	presented "The Emigrant Evremonde."
spam	"What the Devil! How many more of them!" exclaimed the man with the
spam	bloated face.
ham	Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation, and withdrew,
ham	with his two fellow-patriots.
ham	"What the Devil, I say again!" exclaimed the gaoler, left with his wife.
ham	"How many more!"
ham	The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to the question, merely
ham	replied, "One must have patience, my dear!" Three turnkeys who entered
spam	responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and one added, "For
ham	the love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like an inappropriate
spam	conclusion.
spam	The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with a
spam	horrible smell of foul sleep in it. Extraordinary how soon the noisome
spam	flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such places that
ham	are ill cared for!
spam	"In secret, too," grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper. "As
ham	if I was not already full to bursting!"
spam	He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay
spam	awaited his further pleasure for half an hour: sometimes, pacing to and
spam	fro in the strong arched room: sometimes, resting on a stone seat: in
ham	either case detained to be imprinted on the memory of the chief and his
ham	subordinates.
spam	"Come!" said the chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me,
ham	emigrant."
ham	Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by
spam	corridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them,
spam	until they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with
ham	prisoners of both sexes. The women were seated at a long table, reading
ham	and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; the men were for the
ham	most part standing behind their chairs, or lingering up and down the
ham	room.
ham	In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and
spam	disgrace, the new-comer recoiled from this company. But the crowning
spam	unreality of his long unreal ride, was, their all at once rising to
spam	receive him, with every refinement of manner known to the time, and with
ham	all the engaging graces and courtesies of life.
spam	So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners and
spam	gloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor and
ham	misery through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to stand
ham	in a company of the dead. Ghosts all! The ghost of beauty, the ghost
ham	of stateliness, the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride, the ghost of
ham	frivolity, the ghost of wit, the ghost of youth, the ghost of age, all
ham	waiting their dismissal from the desolate shore, all turning on him eyes
spam	that were changed by the death they had died in coming there.
spam	It struck him motionless. The gaoler standing at his side, and the other
ham	gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to appearance
spam	in the ordinary exercise of their functions, looked so extravagantly
ham	coarse contrasted with sorrowing mothers and blooming daughters who were
ham	there--with the apparitions of the coquette, the young beauty, and the
spam	mature woman delicately bred--that the inversion of all experience and
spam	likelihood which the scene of shadows presented, was heightened to its
ham	utmost. Surely, ghosts all. Surely, the long unreal ride some progress
spam	of disease that had brought him to these gloomy shades!
ham	"In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune," said a
ham	gentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward, "I have the
ham	honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and of condoling with you
ham	on the calamity that has brought you among us. May it soon terminate
spam	happily! It would be an impertinence elsewhere, but it is not so here,
ham	to ask your name and condition?"
ham	Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information, in
spam	words as suitable as he could find.
spam	"But I hope," said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with his
spam	eyes, who moved across the room, "that you are not in secret?"
ham	"I do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard them say
spam	so."
spam	"Ah, what a pity! We so much regret it! But take courage; several
ham	members of our society have been in secret, at first, and it has lasted
ham	but a short time." Then he added, raising his voice, "I grieve to inform
spam	the society--in secret."
spam	There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the room
ham	to a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many voices--among
spam	which, the soft and compassionate voices of women were conspicuous--gave
ham	him good wishes and encouragement. He turned at the grated door, to
spam	render the thanks of his heart; it closed under the gaoler's hand; and
spam	the apparitions vanished from his sight forever.
spam	The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward. When they had
ham	ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already counted
ham	them), the gaoler opened a low black door, and they passed into a
ham	solitary cell. It struck cold and damp, but was not dark.
ham	"Yours," said the gaoler.
ham	"Why am I confined alone?"
ham	"How do I know!"
ham	"I can buy pen, ink, and paper?"
ham	"Such are not my orders. You will be visited, and can ask then. At
ham	present, you may buy your food, and nothing more."
spam	There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. As
spam	the gaoler made a general inspection of these objects, and of the four
spam	walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through the mind of
ham	the prisoner leaning against the wall opposite to him, that this gaoler
ham	was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person, as to look like
spam	a man who had been drowned and filled with water. When the gaoler was
spam	gone, he thought in the same wandering way, "Now am I left, as if I were
ham	dead." Stopping then, to look down at the mattress, he turned from it
ham	with a sick feeling, and thought, "And here in these crawling creatures
ham	is the first condition of the body after death."
spam	"Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five
ham	paces by four and a half." The prisoner walked to and fro in his cell,
spam	counting its measurement, and the roar of the city arose like muffled
spam	drums with a wild swell of voices added to them. "He made shoes, he made
spam	shoes, he made shoes." The prisoner counted the measurement again, and
spam	paced faster, to draw his mind with him from that latter repetition.
ham	"The ghosts that vanished when the wicket closed. There was one among
spam	them, the appearance of a lady dressed in black, who was leaning in the
spam	embrasure of a window, and she had a light shining upon her golden
ham	hair, and she looked like * * * * Let us ride on again, for God's sake,
ham	through the illuminated villages with the people all awake! * * * * He
ham	made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and
spam	a half." With such scraps tossing and rolling upward from the depths of
ham	his mind, the prisoner walked faster and faster, obstinately counting
spam	and counting; and the roar of the city changed to this extent--that it
ham	still rolled in like muffled drums, but with the wail of voices that he
ham	knew, in the swell that rose above them.
spam	II. The Grindstone
ham	Tellson's Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris, was
ham	in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut off from
spam	the street by a high wall and a strong gate. The house belonged to
ham	a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made a flight from the
spam	troubles, in his own cook's dress, and got across the borders. A
spam	mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he was still in his
ham	metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, the preparation
ham	of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three strong men
spam	besides the cook in question.
spam	Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from the
ham	sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and
ham	willing to cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and
spam	indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur's
spam	house had been first sequestrated, and then confiscated. For, all
ham	things moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that fierce
ham	precipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumn month
ham	of September, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession of
ham	Monseigneur's house, and had marked it with the tri-colour, and were
ham	drinking brandy in its state apartments.
ham	A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business in Paris,
spam	would soon have driven the House out of its mind and into the Gazette.
spam	For, what would staid British responsibility and respectability have
ham	said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard, and even to a Cupid
ham	over the counter? Yet such things were. Tellson's had whitewashed the
spam	Cupid, but he was still to be seen on the ceiling, in the coolest
ham	linen, aiming (as he very often does) at money from morning to
ham	night. Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of this young Pagan, in
spam	Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtained alcove in the rear of
ham	the immortal boy, and also of a looking-glass let into the wall, and
ham	also of clerks not at all old, who danced in public on the slightest
ham	provocation. Yet, a French Tellson's could get on with these things
spam	exceedingly well, and, as long as the times held together, no man had
ham	taken fright at them, and drawn out his money.
ham	What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what would
spam	lie there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in
ham	Tellson's hiding-places, while the depositors rusted in prisons,
ham	and when they should have violently perished; how many accounts with
ham	Tellson's never to be balanced in this world, must be carried over into
spam	the next; no man could have said, that night, any more than Mr. Jarvis
ham	Lorry could, though he thought heavily of these questions. He sat by
ham	a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and unfruitful year was
ham	prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face there was a
ham	deeper shade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any object in the
spam	room distortedly reflect--a shade of horror.
ham	He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which
ham	he had grown to be a part, like strong root-ivy. It chanced that they
spam	derived a kind of security from the patriotic occupation of the main
ham	building, but the true-hearted old gentleman never calculated about
ham	that. All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he did
ham	his duty. On the opposite side of the courtyard, under a colonnade,
ham	was extensive standing--for carriages--where, indeed, some carriages
spam	of Monseigneur yet stood. Against two of the pillars were fastened two
spam	great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing out in the
spam	open air, was a large grindstone: a roughly mounted thing which appeared
ham	to have hurriedly been brought there from some neighbouring smithy,
ham	or other workshop. Rising and looking out of window at these harmless
ham	objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired to his seat by the fire. He had
ham	opened, not only the glass window, but the lattice blind outside it, and
spam	he had closed both again, and he shivered through his frame.
ham	From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there came
spam	the usual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribable ring
ham	in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a terrible
spam	nature were going up to Heaven.
spam	"Thank God," said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one near and
spam	dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night. May He have mercy on all
spam	who are in danger!"
spam	Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought,
ham	"They have come back!" and sat listening. But, there was no loud
ham	irruption into the courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the gate
spam	clash again, and all was quiet.
ham	The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague
spam	uneasiness respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally
ham	awaken, with such feelings roused. It was well guarded, and he got up to
spam	go among the trusty people who were watching it, when his door suddenly
ham	opened, and two figures rushed in, at sight of which he fell back in
ham	amazement.
spam	Lucie and her father! Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, and with
spam	that old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified, that it
ham	seemed as though it had been stamped upon her face expressly to give
spam	force and power to it in this one passage of her life.
ham	"What is this?" cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. "What is the
spam	matter? Lucie! Manette! What has happened? What has brought you here?
ham	What is it?"
spam	With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness, she panted
spam	out in his arms, imploringly, "O my dear friend! My husband!"
ham	"Your husband, Lucie?"
spam	"Charles."
ham	"What of Charles?"
ham	"Here.
spam	"Here, in Paris?"
ham	"Has been here some days--three or four--I don't know how many--I can't
spam	collect my thoughts. An errand of generosity brought him here unknown to
spam	us; he was stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison."
spam	The old man uttered an irrepressible cry. Almost at the same moment, the
spam	bell of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and voices
ham	came pouring into the courtyard.
ham	"What is that noise?" said the Doctor, turning towards the window.
ham	"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry. "Don't look out! Manette, for your life,
spam	don't touch the blind!"
spam	The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window, and
spam	said, with a cool, bold smile:
ham	"My dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city. I have been
ham	a Bastille prisoner. There is no patriot in Paris--in Paris? In
spam	France--who, knowing me to have been a prisoner in the Bastille, would
spam	touch me, except to overwhelm me with embraces, or carry me in triumph.
ham	My old pain has given me a power that has brought us through the
spam	barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and brought us here. I
spam	knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out of all danger; I
ham	told Lucie so.--What is that noise?" His hand was again upon the window.
spam	"Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate. "No, Lucie, my
spam	dear, nor you!" He got his arm round her, and held her. "Don't be so
ham	terrified, my love. I solemnly swear to you that I know of no harm
ham	having happened to Charles; that I had no suspicion even of his being in
ham	this fatal place. What prison is he in?"
spam	"La Force!"
spam	"La Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable in
ham	your life--and you were always both--you will compose yourself now, to
ham	do exactly as I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can think, or
spam	I can say. There is no help for you in any action on your part to-night;
spam	you cannot possibly stir out. I say this, because what I must bid you
ham	to do for Charles's sake, is the hardest thing to do of all. You must
ham	instantly be obedient, still, and quiet. You must let me put you in a
ham	room at the back here. You must leave your father and me alone for
spam	two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in the world you must not
spam	delay."
ham	"I will be submissive to you. I see in your face that you know I can do
ham	nothing else than this. I know you are true."
spam	The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned the
spam	key; then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window and
spam	partly opened the blind, and put his hand upon the Doctor's arm, and
spam	looked out with him into the courtyard.
ham	Looked out upon a throng of men and women: not enough in number, or near
ham	enough, to fill the courtyard: not more than forty or fifty in all. The
spam	people in possession of the house had let them in at the gate, and they
spam	had rushed in to work at the grindstone; it had evidently been set up
spam	there for their purpose, as in a convenient and retired spot.
ham	But, such awful workers, and such awful work!
spam	The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were two
spam	men, whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the whirlings of
spam	the grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible and cruel than
spam	the visages of the wildest savages in their most barbarous disguise.
spam	False eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck upon them, and their
spam	hideous countenances were all bloody and sweaty, and all awry with
ham	howling, and all staring and glaring with beastly excitement and want of
spam	sleep. As these ruffians turned and turned, their matted locks now flung
spam	forward over their eyes, now flung backward over their necks, some women
spam	held wine to their mouths that they might drink; and what with dropping
spam	blood, and what with dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks
ham	struck out of the stone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and
ham	fire. The eye could not detect one creature in the group free from
ham	the smear of blood. Shouldering one another to get next at the
spam	sharpening-stone, were men stripped to the waist, with the stain all
ham	over their limbs and bodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain
spam	upon those rags; men devilishly set off with spoils of women's lace
ham	and silk and ribbon, with the stain dyeing those trifles through
spam	and through. Hatchets, knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be
spam	sharpened, were all red with it. Some of the hacked swords were tied to
spam	the wrists of those who carried them, with strips of linen and fragments
spam	of dress: ligatures various in kind, but all deep of the one colour. And
spam	as the frantic wielders of these weapons snatched them from the stream
spam	of sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red hue was red in
spam	their frenzied eyes;--eyes which any unbrutalised beholder would have
spam	given twenty years of life, to petrify with a well-directed gun.
ham	All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or of
ham	any human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if it
ham	were there. They drew back from the window, and the Doctor looked for
ham	explanation in his friend's ashy face.
ham	"They are," Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully round at
ham	the locked room, "murdering the prisoners. If you are sure of what you
ham	say; if you really have the power you think you have--as I believe you
spam	have--make yourself known to these devils, and get taken to La Force. It
ham	may be too late, I don't know, but let it not be a minute later!"
ham	Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the room,
spam	and was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.
spam	His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous
spam	confidence of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water,
ham	carried him in an instant to the heart of the concourse at the stone.
ham	For a few moments there was a pause, and a hurry, and a murmur, and
spam	the unintelligible sound of his voice; and then Mr. Lorry saw him,
ham	surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty men long, all
spam	linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out with
spam	cries of--"Live the Bastille prisoner! Help for the Bastille prisoner's
spam	kindred in La Force! Room for the Bastille prisoner in front there! Save
spam	the prisoner Evremonde at La Force!" and a thousand answering shouts.
ham	He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the window
spam	and the curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her father was
ham	assisted by the people, and gone in search of her husband. He found
spam	her child and Miss Pross with her; but, it never occurred to him to be
ham	surprised by their appearance until a long time afterwards, when he sat
ham	watching them in such quiet as the night knew.
ham	Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet,
spam	clinging to his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own
ham	bed, and her head had gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty
spam	charge. O the long, long night, with the moans of the poor wife! And O
ham	the long, long night, with no return of her father and no tidings!
spam	Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded, and the
spam	irruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and spluttered.
spam	"What is it?" cried Lucie, affrighted. "Hush! The soldiers' swords are
spam	sharpened there," said Mr. Lorry. "The place is national property now,
spam	and used as a kind of armoury, my love."
ham	Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful.
spam	Soon afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himself
ham	from the clasping hand, and cautiously looked out again. A man, so
spam	besmeared that he might have been a sorely wounded soldier creeping back
ham	to consciousness on a field of slain, was rising from the pavement by
ham	the side of the grindstone, and looking about him with a vacant air.
ham	Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried in the imperfect light one of
spam	the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to that gorgeous vehicle,
spam	climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to take his rest on its
ham	dainty cushions.
spam	The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again,
spam	and the sun was red on the courtyard. But, the lesser grindstone stood
spam	alone there in the calm morning air, with a red upon it that the sun had
spam	never given, and would never take away.
spam	III. The Shadow
spam	One of the first considerations which arose in the business mind of Mr.
ham	Lorry when business hours came round, was this:--that he had no right to
ham	imperil Tellson's by sheltering the wife of an emigrant prisoner under
ham	the Bank roof. His own possessions, safety, life, he would have hazarded
spam	for Lucie and her child, without a moment's demur; but the great trust
ham	he held was not his own, and as to that business charge he was a strict
ham	man of business.
spam	At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding out
spam	the wine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in reference to
ham	the safest dwelling-place in the distracted state of the city. But, the
ham	same consideration that suggested him, repudiated him; he lived in the
ham	most violent Quarter, and doubtless was influential there, and deep in
spam	its dangerous workings.
ham	Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute's delay
spam	tending to compromise Tellson's, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie. She said
spam	that her father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a short term, in that
ham	Quarter, near the Banking-house. As there was no business objection to
ham	this, and as he foresaw that even if it were all well with Charles, and
ham	he were to be released, he could not hope to leave the city, Mr. Lorry
spam	went out in quest of such a lodging, and found a suitable one, high up
spam	in a removed by-street where the closed blinds in all the other windows
spam	of a high melancholy square of buildings marked deserted homes.
spam	To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss Pross:
spam	giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he had himself.
ham	He left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway that would bear
spam	considerable knocking on the head, and retained to his own occupations.
ham	A disturbed and doleful mind he brought to bear upon them, and slowly
spam	and heavily the day lagged on with him.
spam	It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed. He
ham	was again alone in his room of the previous night, considering what to
spam	do next, when he heard a foot upon the stair. In a few moments, a
spam	man stood in his presence, who, with a keenly observant look at him,
spam	addressed him by his name.
ham	"Your servant," said Mr. Lorry. "Do you know me?"
spam	He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five
ham	to fifty years of age. For answer he repeated, without any change of
spam	emphasis, the words:
spam	"Do you know me?"
spam	"I have seen you somewhere."
ham	"Perhaps at my wine-shop?"
ham	Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said: "You come from Doctor
spam	Manette?"
spam	"Yes. I come from Doctor Manette."
ham	"And what says he? What does he send me?"
spam	Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper. It bore the
ham	words in the Doctor's writing:
ham	    "Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet.
spam	     I have obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note
spam	     from Charles to his wife.  Let the bearer see his wife."
ham	It was dated from La Force, within an hour.
ham	"Will you accompany me," said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved after reading
ham	this note aloud, "to where his wife resides?"
ham	"Yes," returned Defarge.
spam	Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanical
spam	way Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down into the
spam	courtyard. There, they found two women; one, knitting.
spam	"Madame Defarge, surely!" said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in exactly
ham	the same attitude some seventeen years ago.
spam	"It is she," observed her husband.
ham	"Does Madame go with us?" inquired Mr. Lorry, seeing that she moved as
spam	they moved.
spam	"Yes. That she may be able to recognise the faces and know the persons.
spam	It is for their safety."
spam	Beginning to be struck by Defarge's manner, Mr. Lorry looked dubiously
spam	at him, and led the way. Both the women followed; the second woman being
ham	The Vengeance.
ham	They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might,
spam	ascended the staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry,
ham	and found Lucie weeping, alone. She was thrown into a transport by the
spam	tidings Mr. Lorry gave her of her husband, and clasped the hand that
spam	delivered his note--little thinking what it had been doing near him in
spam	the night, and might, but for a chance, have done to him.
ham	     "DEAREST,--Take courage.  I am well, and your father has
ham	      influence around me.  You cannot answer this.
ham	      Kiss our child for me."
ham	That was all the writing. It was so much, however, to her who received
ham	it, that she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed one of the
ham	hands that knitted. It was a passionate, loving, thankful, womanly
spam	action, but the hand made no response--dropped cold and heavy, and took
spam	to its knitting again.
ham	There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check. She stopped in
ham	the act of putting the note in her bosom, and, with her hands yet at her
spam	neck, looked terrified at Madame Defarge. Madame Defarge met the lifted
spam	eyebrows and forehead with a cold, impassive stare.
ham	"My dear," said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; "there are frequent
ham	risings in the streets; and, although it is not likely they will ever
ham	trouble you, Madame Defarge wishes to see those whom she has the power
spam	to protect at such times, to the end that she may know them--that she
spam	may identify them. I believe," said Mr. Lorry, rather halting in his
spam	reassuring words, as the stony manner of all the three impressed itself
spam	upon him more and more, "I state the case, Citizen Defarge?"
spam	Defarge looked gloomily at his wife, and gave no other answer than a
ham	gruff sound of acquiescence.
spam	"You had better, Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to
ham	propitiate, by tone and manner, "have the dear child here, and our
ham	good Pross. Our good Pross, Defarge, is an English lady, and knows no
spam	French."
spam	The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more than a
ham	match for any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and, danger,
spam	appeared with folded arms, and observed in English to The Vengeance,
ham	whom her eyes first encountered, "Well, I am sure, Boldface! I hope
spam	_you_ are pretty well!" She also bestowed a British cough on Madame
spam	Defarge; but, neither of the two took much heed of her.
spam	"Is that his child?" said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work for the
ham	first time, and pointing her knitting-needle at little Lucie as if it
ham	were the finger of Fate.
ham	"Yes, madame," answered Mr. Lorry; "this is our poor prisoner's darling
spam	daughter, and only child."
ham	The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fall so
ham	threatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctively
ham	kneeled on the ground beside her, and held her to her breast. The
ham	shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed then to fall,
spam	threatening and dark, on both the mother and the child.
ham	"It is enough, my husband," said Madame Defarge. "I have seen them. We
spam	may go."
spam	But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in it--not visible and
ham	presented, but indistinct and withheld--to alarm Lucie into saying, as
ham	she laid her appealing hand on Madame Defarge's dress:
ham	"You will be good to my poor husband. You will do him no harm. You will
spam	help me to see him if you can?"
spam	"Your husband is not my business here," returned Madame Defarge, looking
ham	down at her with perfect composure. "It is the daughter of your father
spam	who is my business here."
ham	"For my sake, then, be merciful to my husband. For my child's sake! She
spam	will put her hands together and pray you to be merciful. We are more
ham	afraid of you than of these others."
ham	Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at her husband.
ham	Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumb-nail and looking at her,
spam	collected his face into a sterner expression.
ham	"What is it that your husband says in that little letter?" asked Madame
spam	Defarge, with a lowering smile. "Influence; he says something touching
ham	influence?"
spam	"That my father," said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from her
spam	breast, but with her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it, "has
ham	much influence around him."
spam	"Surely it will release him!" said Madame Defarge. "Let it do so."
spam	"As a wife and mother," cried Lucie, most earnestly, "I implore you to
ham	have pity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess, against
spam	my innocent husband, but to use it in his behalf. O sister-woman, think
spam	of me. As a wife and mother!"
ham	Madame Defarge looked, coldly as ever, at the suppliant, and said,
ham	turning to her friend The Vengeance:
ham	"The wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were as little
spam	as this child, and much less, have not been greatly considered? We have
ham	known _their_ husbands and fathers laid in prison and kept from them,
spam	often enough? All our lives, we have seen our sister-women suffer, in
ham	themselves and in their children, poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst,
spam	sickness, misery, oppression and neglect of all kinds?"
ham	"We have seen nothing else," returned The Vengeance.
spam	"We have borne this a long time," said Madame Defarge, turning her eyes
ham	again upon Lucie. "Judge you! Is it likely that the trouble of one wife
spam	and mother would be much to us now?"
spam	She resumed her knitting and went out. The Vengeance followed. Defarge
spam	went last, and closed the door.
spam	"Courage, my dear Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her. "Courage,
spam	courage! So far all goes well with us--much, much better than it has of
ham	late gone with many poor souls. Cheer up, and have a thankful heart."
ham	"I am not thankless, I hope, but that dreadful woman seems to throw a
ham	shadow on me and on all my hopes."
ham	"Tut, tut!" said Mr. Lorry; "what is this despondency in the brave
spam	little breast? A shadow indeed! No substance in it, Lucie."
spam	But the shadow of the manner of these Defarges was dark upon himself,
ham	for all that, and in his secret mind it troubled him greatly.
ham	IV. Calm in Storm
ham	Doctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day of his
spam	absence. So much of what had happened in that dreadful time as could be
spam	kept from the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed from her, that
spam	not until long afterwards, when France and she were far apart, did she
ham	know that eleven hundred defenceless prisoners of both sexes and all
ham	ages had been killed by the populace; that four days and nights had been
spam	darkened by this deed of horror; and that the air around her had been
spam	tainted by the slain. She only knew that there had been an attack upon
ham	the prisons, that all political prisoners had been in danger, and that
ham	some had been dragged out by the crowd and murdered.
spam	To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecy on
spam	which he had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken him through a
spam	scene of carnage to the prison of La Force. That, in the prison he had
ham	found a self-appointed Tribunal sitting, before which the prisoners were
spam	brought singly, and by which they were rapidly ordered to be put forth
ham	to be massacred, or to be released, or (in a few cases) to be sent back
ham	to their cells. That, presented by his conductors to this Tribunal, he
spam	had announced himself by name and profession as having been for eighteen
ham	years a secret and unaccused prisoner in the Bastille; that, one of the
ham	body so sitting in judgment had risen and identified him, and that this
spam	man was Defarge.
spam	That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table,
spam	that his son-in-law was among the living prisoners, and had pleaded hard
spam	to the Tribunal--of whom some members were asleep and some awake, some
ham	dirty with murder and some clean, some sober and some not--for his life
ham	and liberty. That, in the first frantic greetings lavished on himself as
spam	a notable sufferer under the overthrown system, it had been accorded
ham	to him to have Charles Darnay brought before the lawless Court, and
spam	examined. That, he seemed on the point of being at once released, when
ham	the tide in his favour met with some unexplained check (not intelligible
ham	to the Doctor), which led to a few words of secret conference. That,
ham	the man sitting as President had then informed Doctor Manette that
ham	the prisoner must remain in custody, but should, for his sake, be held
ham	inviolate in safe custody. That, immediately, on a signal, the prisoner
ham	was removed to the interior of the prison again; but, that he, the
spam	Doctor, had then so strongly pleaded for permission to remain and
spam	assure himself that his son-in-law was, through no malice or mischance,
ham	delivered to the concourse whose murderous yells outside the gate had
ham	often drowned the proceedings, that he had obtained the permission, and
ham	had remained in that Hall of Blood until the danger was over.
spam	The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleep by
spam	intervals, shall remain untold. The mad joy over the prisoners who were
ham	saved, had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocity against
spam	those who were cut to pieces. One prisoner there was, he said, who had
ham	been discharged into the street free, but at whom a mistaken savage had
ham	thrust a pike as he passed out. Being besought to go to him and dress
spam	the wound, the Doctor had passed out at the same gate, and had found him
ham	in the arms of a company of Samaritans, who were seated on the bodies
spam	of their victims. With an inconsistency as monstrous as anything in this
spam	awful nightmare, they had helped the healer, and tended the wounded man
spam	with the gentlest solicitude--had made a litter for him and escorted him
ham	carefully from the spot--had then caught up their weapons and plunged
ham	anew into a butchery so dreadful, that the Doctor had covered his eyes
ham	with his hands, and swooned away in the midst of it.
ham	As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the face of
spam	his friend now sixty-two years of age, a misgiving arose within him that
ham	such dread experiences would revive the old danger.
ham	But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect: he had never
spam	at all known him in his present character. For the first time the Doctor
spam	felt, now, that his suffering was strength and power. For the first time
ham	he felt that in that sharp fire, he had slowly forged the iron which
spam	could break the prison door of his daughter's husband, and deliver him.
spam	"It all tended to a good end, my friend; it was not mere waste and ruin.
ham	As my beloved child was helpful in restoring me to myself, I will be
ham	helpful now in restoring the dearest part of herself to her; by the aid
spam	of Heaven I will do it!" Thus, Doctor Manette. And when Jarvis Lorry saw
ham	the kindled eyes, the resolute face, the calm strong look and bearing
spam	of the man whose life always seemed to him to have been stopped, like a
ham	clock, for so many years, and then set going again with an energy which
spam	had lain dormant during the cessation of its usefulness, he believed.
spam	Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with, would
spam	have yielded before his persevering purpose. While he kept himself
spam	in his place, as a physician, whose business was with all degrees
ham	of mankind, bond and free, rich and poor, bad and good, he used his
ham	personal influence so wisely, that he was soon the inspecting physician
spam	of three prisons, and among them of La Force. He could now assure Lucie
spam	that her husband was no longer confined alone, but was mixed with the
spam	general body of prisoners; he saw her husband weekly, and brought sweet
spam	messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimes her husband himself
spam	sent a letter to her (though never by the Doctor's hand), but she was
spam	not permitted to write to him: for, among the many wild suspicions of
ham	plots in the prisons, the wildest of all pointed at emigrants who were
spam	known to have made friends or permanent connections abroad.
ham	This new life of the Doctor's was an anxious life, no doubt; still, the
ham	sagacious Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it.
spam	Nothing unbecoming tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one;
ham	but he observed it as a curiosity. The Doctor knew, that up to that
ham	time, his imprisonment had been associated in the minds of his daughter
ham	and his friend, with his personal affliction, deprivation, and weakness.
spam	Now that this was changed, and he knew himself to be invested through
spam	that old trial with forces to which they both looked for Charles's
spam	ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exalted by the change,
spam	that he took the lead and direction, and required them as the weak, to
spam	trust to him as the strong. The preceding relative positions of himself
spam	and Lucie were reversed, yet only as the liveliest gratitude and
spam	affection could reverse them, for he could have had no pride but in
ham	rendering some service to her who had rendered so much to him. "All
ham	curious to see," thought Mr. Lorry, in his amiably shrewd way, "but all
spam	natural and right; so, take the lead, my dear friend, and keep it; it
spam	couldn't be in better hands."
spam	But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to get
ham	Charles Darnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial,
spam	the public current of the time set too strong and fast for him. The new
ham	era began; the king was tried, doomed, and beheaded; the Republic of
spam	Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, declared for victory or death
ham	against the world in arms; the black flag waved night and day from the
ham	great towers of Notre Dame; three hundred thousand men, summoned to rise
ham	against the tyrants of the earth, rose from all the varying soils
spam	of France, as if the dragon's teeth had been sown broadcast, and
spam	had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain, on rock, in gravel, and
spam	alluvial mud, under the bright sky of the South and under the clouds of
spam	the North, in fell and forest, in the vineyards and the olive-grounds
ham	and among the cropped grass and the stubble of the corn, along the
spam	fruitful banks of the broad rivers, and in the sand of the sea-shore.
spam	What private solicitude could rear itself against the deluge of the Year
ham	One of Liberty--the deluge rising from below, not falling from above,
ham	and with the windows of Heaven shut, not opened!
spam	There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest, no
ham	measurement of time. Though days and nights circled as regularly as when
ham	time was young, and the evening and morning were the first day, other
ham	count of time there was none. Hold of it was lost in the raging fever
spam	of a nation, as it is in the fever of one patient. Now, breaking the
ham	unnatural silence of a whole city, the executioner showed the people the
spam	head of the king--and now, it seemed almost in the same breath, the
spam	head of his fair wife which had had eight weary months of imprisoned
spam	widowhood and misery, to turn it grey.
spam	And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains in
ham	all such cases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast. A
ham	revolutionary tribunal in the capital, and forty or fifty thousand
ham	revolutionary committees all over the land; a law of the Suspected,
ham	which struck away all security for liberty or life, and delivered over
spam	any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one; prisons gorged
ham	with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain no hearing;
ham	these things became the established order and nature of appointed
ham	things, and seemed to be ancient usage before they were many weeks old.
spam	Above all, one hideous figure grew as familiar as if it had been before
spam	the general gaze from the foundations of the world--the figure of the
ham	sharp female called La Guillotine.
ham	It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure for headache,
ham	it infallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, it imparted a
ham	peculiar delicacy to the complexion, it was the National Razor which
spam	shaved close: who kissed La Guillotine, looked through the little window
ham	and sneezed into the sack. It was the sign of the regeneration of the
spam	human race. It superseded the Cross. Models of it were worn on breasts
spam	from which the Cross was discarded, and it was bowed down to and
ham	believed in where the Cross was denied.
ham	It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it most polluted,
ham	were a rotten red. It was taken to pieces, like a toy-puzzle for a young
ham	Devil, and was put together again when the occasion wanted it. It hushed
spam	the eloquent, struck down the powerful, abolished the beautiful and
spam	good. Twenty-two friends of high public mark, twenty-one living and one
spam	dead, it had lopped the heads off, in one morning, in as many minutes.
spam	The name of the strong man of Old Scripture had descended to the chief
spam	functionary who worked it; but, so armed, he was stronger than his
spam	namesake, and blinder, and tore away the gates of God's own Temple every
ham	day.
ham	Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctor walked
ham	with a steady head: confident in his power, cautiously persistent in his
spam	end, never doubting that he would save Lucie's husband at last. Yet the
spam	current of the time swept by, so strong and deep, and carried the time
ham	away so fiercely, that Charles had lain in prison one year and three
ham	months when the Doctor was thus steady and confident. So much more
ham	wicked and distracted had the Revolution grown in that December month,
ham	that the rivers of the South were encumbered with the bodies of the
spam	violently drowned by night, and prisoners were shot in lines and squares
spam	under the southern wintry sun. Still, the Doctor walked among the
spam	terrors with a steady head. No man better known than he, in Paris at
spam	that day; no man in a stranger situation. Silent, humane, indispensable
ham	in hospital and prison, using his art equally among assassins and
ham	victims, he was a man apart. In the exercise of his skill, the
ham	appearance and the story of the Bastille Captive removed him from all
spam	other men. He was not suspected or brought in question, any more than if
ham	he had indeed been recalled to life some eighteen years before, or were
spam	a Spirit moving among mortals.
spam	V. The Wood-Sawyer
spam	One year and three months. During all that time Lucie was never
spam	sure, from hour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off her
spam	husband's head next day. Every day, through the stony streets, the
spam	tumbrils now jolted heavily, filled with Condemned. Lovely girls; bright
spam	women, brown-haired, black-haired, and grey; youths; stalwart men and
spam	old; gentle born and peasant born; all red wine for La Guillotine, all
ham	daily brought into light from the dark cellars of the loathsome prisons,
ham	and carried to her through the streets to slake her devouring thirst.
ham	Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;--the last, much the easiest to
ham	bestow, O Guillotine!
spam	If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of the time,
spam	had stunned the Doctor's daughter into awaiting the result in idle
spam	despair, it would but have been with her as it was with many. But, from
spam	the hour when she had taken the white head to her fresh young bosom in
spam	the garret of Saint Antoine, she had been true to her duties. She was
ham	truest to them in the season of trial, as all the quietly loyal and good
ham	will always be.
ham	As soon as they were established in their new residence, and her father
ham	had entered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged the little
ham	household as exactly as if her husband had been there. Everything had
spam	its appointed place and its appointed time. Little Lucie she taught,
spam	as regularly, as if they had all been united in their English home. The
spam	slight devices with which she cheated herself into the show of a belief
spam	that they would soon be reunited--the little preparations for his speedy
spam	return, the setting aside of his chair and his books--these, and the
ham	solemn prayer at night for one dear prisoner especially, among the many
spam	unhappy souls in prison and the shadow of death--were almost the only
spam	outspoken reliefs of her heavy mind.
ham	She did not greatly alter in appearance. The plain dark dresses, akin to
ham	mourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neat and as well
ham	attended to as the brighter clothes of happy days. She lost her colour,
ham	and the old and intent expression was a constant, not an occasional,
spam	thing; otherwise, she remained very pretty and comely. Sometimes, at
spam	night on kissing her father, she would burst into the grief she had
spam	repressed all day, and would say that her sole reliance, under Heaven,
spam	was on him. He always resolutely answered: "Nothing can happen to him
spam	without my knowledge, and I know that I can save him, Lucie."
ham	They had not made the round of their changed life many weeks, when her
spam	father said to her, on coming home one evening:
spam	"My dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charles can
ham	sometimes gain access at three in the afternoon. When he can get to
ham	it--which depends on many uncertainties and incidents--he might see you
ham	in the street, he thinks, if you stood in a certain place that I can
spam	show you. But you will not be able to see him, my poor child, and even
ham	if you could, it would be unsafe for you to make a sign of recognition."
ham	"O show me the place, my father, and I will go there every day."
spam	From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours. As the
ham	clock struck two, she was there, and at four she turned resignedly away.
spam	When it was not too wet or inclement for her child to be with her, they
ham	went together; at other times she was alone; but, she never missed a
spam	single day.
ham	It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street. The hovel
spam	of a cutter of wood into lengths for burning, was the only house at that
ham	end; all else was wall. On the third day of her being there, he noticed
ham	her.
ham	"Good day, citizeness."
ham	"Good day, citizen."
spam	This mode of address was now prescribed by decree. It had been
ham	established voluntarily some time ago, among the more thorough patriots;
ham	but, was now law for everybody.
spam	"Walking here again, citizeness?"
ham	"You see me, citizen!"
spam	The wood-sawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture (he
spam	had once been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison, pointed
spam	at the prison, and putting his ten fingers before his face to represent
ham	bars, peeped through them jocosely.
ham	"But it's not my business," said he. And went on sawing his wood.
spam	Next day he was looking out for her, and accosted her the moment she
ham	appeared.
ham	"What? Walking here again, citizeness?"
ham	"Yes, citizen."
ham	"Ah! A child too! Your mother, is it not, my little citizeness?"
ham	"Do I say yes, mamma?" whispered little Lucie, drawing close to her.
ham	"Yes, dearest."
ham	"Yes, citizen."
spam	"Ah! But it's not my business. My work is my business. See my saw! I
ham	call it my Little Guillotine. La, la, la; La, la, la! And off his head
spam	comes!"
spam	The billet fell as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket.
ham	"I call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine. See here again!
ham	Loo, loo, loo; Loo, loo, loo! And off _her_ head comes! Now, a child.
ham	Tickle, tickle; Pickle, pickle! And off _its_ head comes. All the
spam	family!"
spam	Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but it was
spam	impossible to be there while the wood-sawyer was at work, and not be in
ham	his sight. Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she always spoke to him
ham	first, and often gave him drink-money, which he readily received.
ham	He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quite forgotten
ham	him in gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in lifting her heart
ham	up to her husband, she would come to herself to find him looking at her,
spam	with his knee on his bench and his saw stopped in its work. "But it's
spam	not my business!" he would generally say at those times, and would
ham	briskly fall to his sawing again.
spam	In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter winds of
spam	spring, in the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, and again
spam	in the snow and frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours of every day at
ham	this place; and every day on leaving it, she kissed the prison wall.
spam	Her husband saw her (so she learned from her father) it might be once in
ham	five or six times: it might be twice or thrice running: it might be, not
spam	for a week or a fortnight together. It was enough that he could and did
spam	see her when the chances served, and on that possibility she would have
ham	waited out the day, seven days a week.
ham	These occupations brought her round to the December month, wherein her
spam	father walked among the terrors with a steady head. On a lightly-snowing
ham	afternoon she arrived at the usual corner. It was a day of some wild
spam	rejoicing, and a festival. She had seen the houses, as she came along,
spam	decorated with little pikes, and with little red caps stuck upon them;
spam	also, with tricoloured ribbons; also, with the standard inscription
spam	(tricoloured letters were the favourite), Republic One and Indivisible.
ham	Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!
ham	The miserable shop of the wood-sawyer was so small, that its whole
spam	surface furnished very indifferent space for this legend. He had got
spam	somebody to scrawl it up for him, however, who had squeezed Death in
ham	with most inappropriate difficulty. On his house-top, he displayed pike
ham	and cap, as a good citizen must, and in a window he had stationed his
spam	saw inscribed as his "Little Sainte Guillotine"--for the great sharp
spam	female was by that time popularly canonised. His shop was shut and he
spam	was not there, which was a relief to Lucie, and left her quite alone.
ham	But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movement
spam	and a shouting coming along, which filled her with fear. A moment
spam	afterwards, and a throng of people came pouring round the corner by the
ham	prison wall, in the midst of whom was the wood-sawyer hand in hand with
spam	The Vengeance. There could not be fewer than five hundred people, and
ham	they were dancing like five thousand demons. There was no other music
spam	than their own singing. They danced to the popular Revolution song,
ham	keeping a ferocious time that was like a gnashing of teeth in unison.
spam	Men and women danced together, women danced together, men danced
spam	together, as hazard had brought them together. At first, they were a
spam	mere storm of coarse red caps and coarse woollen rags; but, as they
ham	filled the place, and stopped to dance about Lucie, some ghastly
ham	apparition of a dance-figure gone raving mad arose among them. They
ham	advanced, retreated, struck at one another's hands, clutched at one
spam	another's heads, spun round alone, caught one another and spun round
ham	in pairs, until many of them dropped. While those were down, the rest
ham	linked hand in hand, and all spun round together: then the ring broke,
ham	and in separate rings of two and four they turned and turned until they
spam	all stopped at once, began again, struck, clutched, and tore, and then
ham	reversed the spin, and all spun round another way. Suddenly they stopped
ham	again, paused, struck out the time afresh, formed into lines the width
ham	of the public way, and, with their heads low down and their hands high
spam	up, swooped screaming off. No fight could have been half so terrible
ham	as this dance. It was so emphatically a fallen sport--a something, once
spam	innocent, delivered over to all devilry--a healthy pastime changed into
spam	a means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses, and steeling the
ham	heart. Such grace as was visible in it, made it the uglier, showing how
ham	warped and perverted all things good by nature were become. The maidenly
ham	bosom bared to this, the pretty almost-child's head thus distracted, the
spam	delicate foot mincing in this slough of blood and dirt, were types of
spam	the disjointed time.
spam	This was the Carmagnole. As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and
ham	bewildered in the doorway of the wood-sawyer's house, the feathery snow
spam	fell as quietly and lay as white and soft, as if it had never been.
ham	"O my father!" for he stood before her when she lifted up the eyes she
ham	had momentarily darkened with her hand; "such a cruel, bad sight."
ham	"I know, my dear, I know. I have seen it many times. Don't be
spam	frightened! Not one of them would harm you."
ham	"I am not frightened for myself, my father. But when I think of my
spam	husband, and the mercies of these people--"
spam	"We will set him above their mercies very soon. I left him climbing to
ham	the window, and I came to tell you. There is no one here to see. You may
ham	kiss your hand towards that highest shelving roof."
ham	"I do so, father, and I send him my Soul with it!"
ham	"You cannot see him, my poor dear?"
spam	"No, father," said Lucie, yearning and weeping as she kissed her hand,
ham	"no."
spam	A footstep in the snow. Madame Defarge. "I salute you, citizeness,"
ham	from the Doctor. "I salute you, citizen." This in passing. Nothing more.
ham	Madame Defarge gone, like a shadow over the white road.
spam	"Give me your arm, my love. Pass from here with an air of cheerfulness
spam	and courage, for his sake. That was well done;" they had left the spot;
ham	"it shall not be in vain. Charles is summoned for to-morrow."
spam	"For to-morrow!"
ham	"There is no time to lose. I am well prepared, but there are precautions
spam	to be taken, that could not be taken until he was actually summoned
spam	before the Tribunal. He has not received the notice yet, but I know
spam	that he will presently be summoned for to-morrow, and removed to the
spam	Conciergerie; I have timely information. You are not afraid?"
spam	She could scarcely answer, "I trust in you."
ham	"Do so, implicitly. Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; he shall
ham	be restored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed him with every
ham	protection. I must see Lorry."
ham	He stopped. There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing. They
spam	both knew too well what it meant. One. Two. Three. Three tumbrils faring
ham	away with their dread loads over the hushing snow.
ham	"I must see Lorry," the Doctor repeated, turning her another way.
ham	The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it. He
spam	and his books were in frequent requisition as to property confiscated
ham	and made national. What he could save for the owners, he saved. No
ham	better man living to hold fast by what Tellson's had in keeping, and to
spam	hold his peace.
spam	A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denoted
ham	the approach of darkness. It was almost dark when they arrived at the
ham	Bank. The stately residence of Monseigneur was altogether blighted and
spam	deserted. Above a heap of dust and ashes in the court, ran the letters:
spam	National Property. Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality,
spam	Fraternity, or Death!
spam	Who could that be with Mr. Lorry--the owner of the riding-coat upon the
spam	chair--who must not be seen? From whom newly arrived, did he come out,
spam	agitated and surprised, to take his favourite in his arms? To whom did
spam	he appear to repeat her faltering words, when, raising his voice and
ham	turning his head towards the door of the room from which he had issued,
ham	he said: "Removed to the Conciergerie, and summoned for to-morrow?"
spam	VI. Triumph
ham	The dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determined
spam	Jury, sat every day. Their lists went forth every evening, and were
ham	read out by the gaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners. The
spam	standard gaoler-joke was, "Come out and listen to the Evening Paper, you
spam	inside there!"
ham	"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay!"
ham	So at last began the Evening Paper at La Force.
ham	When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reserved
ham	for those who were announced as being thus fatally recorded. Charles
ham	Evremonde, called Darnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seen
ham	hundreds pass away so.
spam	His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced over them
spam	to assure himself that he had taken his place, and went through the
spam	list, making a similar short pause at each name. There were twenty-three
ham	names, but only twenty were responded to; for one of the prisoners so
spam	summoned had died in gaol and been forgotten, and two had already been
ham	guillotined and forgotten. The list was read, in the vaulted chamber
spam	where Darnay had seen the associated prisoners on the night of his
ham	arrival. Every one of those had perished in the massacre; every human
ham	creature he had since cared for and parted with, had died on the
spam	scaffold.
spam	There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the parting was
ham	soon over. It was the incident of every day, and the society of La Force
ham	were engaged in the preparation of some games of forfeits and a little
spam	concert, for that evening. They crowded to the grates and shed tears
spam	there; but, twenty places in the projected entertainments had to be
spam	refilled, and the time was, at best, short to the lock-up hour, when the
ham	common rooms and corridors would be delivered over to the great dogs
spam	who kept watch there through the night. The prisoners were far from
ham	insensible or unfeeling; their ways arose out of the condition of the
ham	time. Similarly, though with a subtle difference, a species of fervour
spam	or intoxication, known, without doubt, to have led some persons to
ham	brave the guillotine unnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere
spam	boastfulness, but a wild infection of the wildly shaken public mind. In
spam	seasons of pestilence, some of us will have a secret attraction to the
spam	disease--a terrible passing inclination to die of it. And all of us have
spam	like wonders hidden in our breasts, only needing circumstances to evoke
spam	them.
spam	The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in its
spam	vermin-haunted cells was long and cold. Next day, fifteen prisoners were
spam	put to the bar before Charles Darnay's name was called. All the fifteen
ham	were condemned, and the trials of the whole occupied an hour and a half.
spam	"Charles Evremonde, called Darnay," was at length arraigned.
spam	His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough red cap
ham	and tricoloured cockade was the head-dress otherwise prevailing. Looking
spam	at the Jury and the turbulent audience, he might have thought that the
spam	usual order of things was reversed, and that the felons were trying the
ham	honest men. The lowest, cruelest, and worst populace of a city, never
ham	without its quantity of low, cruel, and bad, were the directing
spam	spirits of the scene: noisily commenting, applauding, disapproving,
spam	anticipating, and precipitating the result, without a check. Of the men,
ham	the greater part were armed in various ways; of the women, some wore
ham	knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as they looked on, many
ham	knitted. Among these last, was one, with a spare piece of knitting under
spam	her arm as she worked. She was in a front row, by the side of a man whom
spam	he had never seen since his arrival at the Barrier, but whom he directly
ham	remembered as Defarge. He noticed that she once or twice whispered in
spam	his ear, and that she seemed to be his wife; but, what he most noticed
ham	in the two figures was, that although they were posted as close to
spam	himself as they could be, they never looked towards him. They seemed to
spam	be waiting for something with a dogged determination, and they looked at
spam	the Jury, but at nothing else. Under the President sat Doctor Manette,
spam	in his usual quiet dress. As well as the prisoner could see, he and Mr.
spam	Lorry were the only men there, unconnected with the Tribunal, who
ham	wore their usual clothes, and had not assumed the coarse garb of the
ham	Carmagnole.
spam	Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, was accused by the public prosecutor
spam	as an emigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic, under the decree
spam	which banished all emigrants on pain of Death. It was nothing that the
spam	decree bore date since his return to France. There he was, and there was
ham	the decree; he had been taken in France, and his head was demanded.
spam	"Take off his head!" cried the audience. "An enemy to the Republic!"
ham	The President rang his bell to silence those cries, and asked the
spam	prisoner whether it was not true that he had lived many years in
ham	England?
spam	Undoubtedly it was.
ham	Was he not an emigrant then? What did he call himself?
spam	Not an emigrant, he hoped, within the sense and spirit of the law.
spam	Why not? the President desired to know.
spam	Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distasteful
spam	to him, and a station that was distasteful to him, and had left
spam	his country--he submitted before the word emigrant in the present
ham	acceptation by the Tribunal was in use--to live by his own industry in
spam	England, rather than on the industry of the overladen people of France.
spam	What proof had he of this?
ham	He handed in the names of two witnesses; Theophile Gabelle, and
ham	Alexandre Manette.
ham	But he had married in England? the President reminded him.
spam	True, but not an English woman.
ham	A citizeness of France?
spam	Yes. By birth.
spam	Her name and family?
ham	"Lucie Manette, only daughter of Doctor Manette, the good physician who
ham	sits there."
ham	This answer had a happy effect upon the audience. Cries in exaltation
spam	of the well-known good physician rent the hall. So capriciously were
spam	the people moved, that tears immediately rolled down several ferocious
ham	countenances which had been glaring at the prisoner a moment before, as
spam	if with impatience to pluck him out into the streets and kill him.
ham	On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set his foot
spam	according to Doctor Manette's reiterated instructions. The same cautious
spam	counsel directed every step that lay before him, and had prepared every
ham	inch of his road.
ham	The President asked, why had he returned to France when he did, and not
ham	sooner?
ham	He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had no means
ham	of living in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, in England,
spam	he lived by giving instruction in the French language and literature.
spam	He had returned when he did, on the pressing and written entreaty of
spam	a French citizen, who represented that his life was endangered by his
spam	absence. He had come back, to save a citizen's life, and to bear his
spam	testimony, at whatever personal hazard, to the truth. Was that criminal
ham	in the eyes of the Republic?
spam	The populace cried enthusiastically, "No!" and the President rang his
ham	bell to quiet them. Which it did not, for they continued to cry "No!"
spam	until they left off, of their own will.
spam	The President required the name of that citizen. The accused explained
ham	that the citizen was his first witness. He also referred with confidence
spam	to the citizen's letter, which had been taken from him at the Barrier,
spam	but which he did not doubt would be found among the papers then before
ham	the President.
spam	The Doctor had taken care that it should be there--had assured him that
ham	it would be there--and at this stage of the proceedings it was produced
spam	and read. Citizen Gabelle was called to confirm it, and did so. Citizen
spam	Gabelle hinted, with infinite delicacy and politeness, that in the
ham	pressure of business imposed on the Tribunal by the multitude of
ham	enemies of the Republic with which it had to deal, he had been slightly
ham	overlooked in his prison of the Abbaye--in fact, had rather passed out
spam	of the Tribunal's patriotic remembrance--until three days ago; when he
spam	had been summoned before it, and had been set at liberty on the Jury's
spam	declaring themselves satisfied that the accusation against him was
ham	answered, as to himself, by the surrender of the citizen Evremonde,
spam	called Darnay.
spam	Doctor Manette was next questioned. His high personal popularity,
spam	and the clearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as he
ham	proceeded, as he showed that the Accused was his first friend on his
spam	release from his long imprisonment; that, the accused had remained in
spam	England, always faithful and devoted to his daughter and himself in
ham	their exile; that, so far from being in favour with the Aristocrat
spam	government there, he had actually been tried for his life by it, as
spam	the foe of England and friend of the United States--as he brought these
ham	circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and with the
ham	straightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and the
spam	populace became one. At last, when he appealed by name to Monsieur
ham	Lorry, an English gentleman then and there present, who, like himself,
ham	had been a witness on that English trial and could corroborate his
spam	account of it, the Jury declared that they had heard enough, and that
ham	they were ready with their votes if the President were content to
spam	receive them.
spam	At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), the populace
spam	set up a shout of applause. All the voices were in the prisoner's
ham	favour, and the President declared him free.
spam	Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populace
ham	sometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulses towards
ham	generosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some set-off against
spam	their swollen account of cruel rage. No man can decide now to which of
spam	these motives such extraordinary scenes were referable; it is probable,
ham	to a blending of all the three, with the second predominating. No sooner
spam	was the acquittal pronounced, than tears were shed as freely as blood
spam	at another time, and such fraternal embraces were bestowed upon the
spam	prisoner by as many of both sexes as could rush at him, that after
spam	his long and unwholesome confinement he was in danger of fainting from
ham	exhaustion; none the less because he knew very well, that the very same
ham	people, carried by another current, would have rushed at him with
spam	the very same intensity, to rend him to pieces and strew him over the
ham	streets.
spam	His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to be tried,
ham	rescued him from these caresses for the moment. Five were to be tried
spam	together, next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch as they had not
spam	assisted it by word or deed. So quick was the Tribunal to compensate
spam	itself and the nation for a chance lost, that these five came down to
spam	him before he left the place, condemned to die within twenty-four
ham	hours. The first of them told him so, with the customary prison sign
ham	of Death--a raised finger--and they all added in words, "Long live the
ham	Republic!"
ham	The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen their proceedings,
spam	for when he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate, there was a great
ham	crowd about it, in which there seemed to be every face he had seen in
ham	Court--except two, for which he looked in vain. On his coming out, the
ham	concourse made at him anew, weeping, embracing, and shouting, all by
spam	turns and all together, until the very tide of the river on the bank of
ham	which the mad scene was acted, seemed to run mad, like the people on the
spam	shore.
ham	They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which they had
ham	taken either out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms or passages.
spam	Over the chair they had thrown a red flag, and to the back of it they
ham	had bound a pike with a red cap on its top. In this car of triumph, not
ham	even the Doctor's entreaties could prevent his being carried to his home
ham	on men's shoulders, with a confused sea of red caps heaving about him,
ham	and casting up to sight from the stormy deep such wrecks of faces, that
spam	he more than once misdoubted his mind being in confusion, and that he
ham	was in the tumbril on his way to the Guillotine.
ham	In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointing
ham	him out, they carried him on. Reddening the snowy streets with the
ham	prevailing Republican colour, in winding and tramping through them, as
spam	they had reddened them below the snow with a deeper dye, they carried
spam	him thus into the courtyard of the building where he lived. Her father
ham	had gone on before, to prepare her, and when her husband stood upon his
spam	feet, she dropped insensible in his arms.
ham	As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between his
spam	face and the brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips might come
spam	together unseen, a few of the people fell to dancing. Instantly, all the
ham	rest fell to dancing, and the courtyard overflowed with the Carmagnole.
ham	Then, they elevated into the vacant chair a young woman from the
ham	crowd to be carried as the Goddess of Liberty, and then swelling and
spam	overflowing out into the adjacent streets, and along the river's bank,
ham	and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them every one and whirled
ham	them away.
ham	After grasping the Doctor's hand, as he stood victorious and proud
ham	before him; after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting in
ham	breathless from his struggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole;
spam	after kissing little Lucie, who was lifted up to clasp her arms round
spam	his neck; and after embracing the ever zealous and faithful Pross who
ham	lifted her; he took his wife in his arms, and carried her up to their
ham	rooms.
spam	"Lucie! My own! I am safe."
spam	"O dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees as I have
ham	prayed to Him."
ham	They all reverently bowed their heads and hearts. When she was again in
ham	his arms, he said to her:
ham	"And now speak to your father, dearest. No other man in all this France
ham	could have done what he has done for me."
spam	She laid her head upon her father's breast, as she had laid his poor
spam	head on her own breast, long, long ago. He was happy in the return he
spam	had made her, he was recompensed for his suffering, he was proud of his
ham	strength. "You must not be weak, my darling," he remonstrated; "don't
spam	tremble so. I have saved him."
spam	VII. A Knock at the Door
spam	"I have saved him." It was not another of the dreams in which he had
ham	often come back; he was really here. And yet his wife trembled, and a
spam	vague but heavy fear was upon her.
ham	All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were so passionately
ham	revengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantly put to death on
spam	vague suspicion and black malice, it was so impossible to forget that
ham	many as blameless as her husband and as dear to others as he was to
ham	her, every day shared the fate from which he had been clutched, that her
spam	heart could not be as lightened of its load as she felt it ought to be.
ham	The shadows of the wintry afternoon were beginning to fall, and even now
ham	the dreadful carts were rolling through the streets. Her mind pursued
spam	them, looking for him among the Condemned; and then she clung closer to
spam	his real presence and trembled more.
spam	Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to this
ham	woman's weakness, which was wonderful to see. No garret, no shoemaking,
ham	no One Hundred and Five, North Tower, now! He had accomplished the task
ham	he had set himself, his promise was redeemed, he had saved Charles. Let
spam	them all lean upon him.
spam	Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind: not only because that was
ham	the safest way of life, involving the least offence to the people, but
spam	because they were not rich, and Charles, throughout his imprisonment,
ham	had had to pay heavily for his bad food, and for his guard, and towards
ham	the living of the poorer prisoners. Partly on this account, and
ham	partly to avoid a domestic spy, they kept no servant; the citizen and
ham	citizeness who acted as porters at the courtyard gate, rendered them
ham	occasional service; and Jerry (almost wholly transferred to them by
spam	Mr. Lorry) had become their daily retainer, and had his bed there every
spam	night.
spam	It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty,
ham	Equality, Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of every
ham	house, the name of every inmate must be legibly inscribed in letters
spam	of a certain size, at a certain convenient height from the ground. Mr.
spam	Jerry Cruncher's name, therefore, duly embellished the doorpost down
ham	below; and, as the afternoon shadows deepened, the owner of that name
spam	himself appeared, from overlooking a painter whom Doctor Manette had
ham	employed to add to the list the name of Charles Evremonde, called
spam	Darnay.
spam	In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all the usual
ham	harmless ways of life were changed. In the Doctor's little household, as
spam	in very many others, the articles of daily consumption that were wanted
spam	were purchased every evening, in small quantities and at various small
ham	shops. To avoid attracting notice, and to give as little occasion as
spam	possible for talk and envy, was the general desire.
spam	For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged the
spam	office of purveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, the
ham	basket. Every afternoon at about the time when the public lamps were
ham	lighted, they fared forth on this duty, and made and brought home
ham	such purchases as were needful. Although Miss Pross, through her long
ham	association with a French family, might have known as much of their
ham	language as of her own, if she had had a mind, she had no mind in that
spam	direction; consequently she knew no more of that "nonsense" (as she was
spam	pleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did. So her manner of marketing
spam	was to plump a noun-substantive at the head of a shopkeeper without any
spam	introduction in the nature of an article, and, if it happened not to be
ham	the name of the thing she wanted, to look round for that thing, lay hold
ham	of it, and hold on by it until the bargain was concluded. She always
ham	made a bargain for it, by holding up, as a statement of its just price,
spam	one finger less than the merchant held up, whatever his number might be.
spam	"Now, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose eyes were red with felicity;
spam	"if you are ready, I am."
spam	Jerry hoarsely professed himself at Miss Pross's service. He had worn
spam	all his rust off long ago, but nothing would file his spiky head down.
ham	"There's all manner of things wanted," said Miss Pross, "and we shall
ham	have a precious time of it. We want wine, among the rest. Nice toasts
spam	these Redheads will be drinking, wherever we buy it."
ham	"It will be much the same to your knowledge, miss, I should think,"
spam	retorted Jerry, "whether they drink your health or the Old Un's."
ham	"Who's he?" said Miss Pross.
ham	Mr. Cruncher, with some diffidence, explained himself as meaning "Old
spam	Nick's."
ham	"Ha!" said Miss Pross, "it doesn't need an interpreter to explain the
spam	meaning of these creatures. They have but one, and it's Midnight Murder,
ham	and Mischief."
ham	"Hush, dear! Pray, pray, be cautious!" cried Lucie.
ham	"Yes, yes, yes, I'll be cautious," said Miss Pross; "but I may say
ham	among ourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoey
spam	smotherings in the form of embracings all round, going on in the
spam	streets. Now, Ladybird, never you stir from that fire till I come back!
spam	Take care of the dear husband you have recovered, and don't move your
spam	pretty head from his shoulder as you have it now, till you see me again!
spam	May I ask a question, Doctor Manette, before I go?"
spam	"I think you may take that liberty," the Doctor answered, smiling.
ham	"For gracious sake, don't talk about Liberty; we have quite enough of
ham	that," said Miss Pross.
ham	"Hush, dear! Again?" Lucie remonstrated.
ham	"Well, my sweet," said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically, "the
spam	short and the long of it is, that I am a subject of His Most Gracious
ham	Majesty King George the Third;" Miss Pross curtseyed at the name; "and
ham	as such, my maxim is, Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish
ham	tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!"
spam	Mr. Cruncher, in an access of loyalty, growlingly repeated the words
ham	after Miss Pross, like somebody at church.
ham	"I am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wish you
spam	had never taken that cold in your voice," said Miss Pross, approvingly.
spam	"But the question, Doctor Manette. Is there"--it was the good creature's
spam	way to affect to make light of anything that was a great anxiety
spam	with them all, and to come at it in this chance manner--"is there any
spam	prospect yet, of our getting out of this place?"
ham	"I fear not yet. It would be dangerous for Charles yet."
spam	"Heigh-ho-hum!" said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as she
ham	glanced at her darling's golden hair in the light of the fire, "then we
spam	must have patience and wait: that's all. We must hold up our heads and
spam	fight low, as my brother Solomon used to say. Now, Mr. Cruncher!--Don't
ham	you move, Ladybird!"
ham	They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and the
ham	child, by a bright fire. Mr. Lorry was expected back presently from the
spam	Banking House. Miss Pross had lighted the lamp, but had put it aside in
ham	a corner, that they might enjoy the fire-light undisturbed. Little Lucie
ham	sat by her grandfather with her hands clasped through his arm: and he,
spam	in a tone not rising much above a whisper, began to tell her a story of
ham	a great and powerful Fairy who had opened a prison-wall and let out
ham	a captive who had once done the Fairy a service. All was subdued and
spam	quiet, and Lucie was more at ease than she had been.
ham	"What is that?" she cried, all at once.
ham	"My dear!" said her father, stopping in his story, and laying his hand
spam	on hers, "command yourself. What a disordered state you are in! The
spam	least thing--nothing--startles you! _You_, your father's daughter!"
spam	"I thought, my father," said Lucie, excusing herself, with a pale face
spam	and in a faltering voice, "that I heard strange feet upon the stairs."
spam	"My love, the staircase is as still as Death."
spam	As he said the word, a blow was struck upon the door.
spam	"Oh father, father. What can this be! Hide Charles. Save him!"
ham	"My child," said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon her
spam	shoulder, "I _have_ saved him. What weakness is this, my dear! Let me go
ham	to the door."
ham	He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outer rooms,
ham	and opened it. A rude clattering of feet over the floor, and four rough
ham	men in red caps, armed with sabres and pistols, entered the room.
ham	"The Citizen Evremonde, called Darnay," said the first.
ham	"Who seeks him?" answered Darnay.
ham	"I seek him. We seek him. I know you, Evremonde; I saw you before the
ham	Tribunal to-day. You are again the prisoner of the Republic."
ham	The four surrounded him, where he stood with his wife and child clinging
spam	to him.
spam	"Tell me how and why am I again a prisoner?"
ham	"It is enough that you return straight to the Conciergerie, and will
ham	know to-morrow. You are summoned for to-morrow."
ham	Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, that he
spam	stood with the lamp in his hand, as if he were a statue made to hold it,
spam	moved after these words were spoken, put the lamp down, and confronting
ham	the speaker, and taking him, not ungently, by the loose front of his red
ham	woollen shirt, said:
spam	"You know him, you have said. Do you know me?"
spam	"Yes, I know you, Citizen Doctor."
ham	"We all know you, Citizen Doctor," said the other three.
ham	He looked abstractedly from one to another, and said, in a lower voice,
ham	after a pause:
spam	"Will you answer his question to me then? How does this happen?"
ham	"Citizen Doctor," said the first, reluctantly, "he has been denounced to
ham	the Section of Saint Antoine. This citizen," pointing out the second who
ham	had entered, "is from Saint Antoine."
spam	The citizen here indicated nodded his head, and added:
spam	"He is accused by Saint Antoine."
spam	"Of what?" asked the Doctor.
spam	"Citizen Doctor," said the first, with his former reluctance, "ask no
spam	more. If the Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt you as
spam	a good patriot will be happy to make them. The Republic goes before all.
ham	The People is supreme. Evremonde, we are pressed."
ham	"One word," the Doctor entreated. "Will you tell me who denounced him?"
spam	"It is against rule," answered the first; "but you can ask Him of Saint
spam	Antoine here."
ham	The Doctor turned his eyes upon that man. Who moved uneasily on his
spam	feet, rubbed his beard a little, and at length said:
spam	"Well! Truly it is against rule. But he is denounced--and gravely--by
spam	the Citizen and Citizeness Defarge. And by one other."
ham	"What other?"
ham	"Do _you_ ask, Citizen Doctor?"
spam	"Yes."
spam	"Then," said he of Saint Antoine, with a strange look, "you will be
spam	answered to-morrow. Now, I am dumb!"
spam	VIII. A Hand at Cards
spam	Happily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threaded her
spam	way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridge of the
spam	Pont-Neuf, reckoning in her mind the number of indispensable purchases
ham	she had to make. Mr. Cruncher, with the basket, walked at her side. They
ham	both looked to the right and to the left into most of the shops they
spam	passed, had a wary eye for all gregarious assemblages of people, and
ham	turned out of their road to avoid any very excited group of talkers. It
spam	was a raw evening, and the misty river, blurred to the eye with blazing
ham	lights and to the ear with harsh noises, showed where the barges were
spam	stationed in which the smiths worked, making guns for the Army of the
spam	Republic. Woe to the man who played tricks with _that_ Army, or got
ham	undeserved promotion in it! Better for him that his beard had never
ham	grown, for the National Razor shaved him close.
spam	Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure of oil
ham	for the lamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine they wanted.
spam	After peeping into several wine-shops, she stopped at the sign of the
ham	Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, not far from the National Palace,
spam	once (and twice) the Tuileries, where the aspect of things rather
spam	took her fancy. It had a quieter look than any other place of the same
spam	description they had passed, and, though red with patriotic caps, was
ham	not so red as the rest. Sounding Mr. Cruncher, and finding him of her
ham	opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity,
ham	attended by her cavalier.
spam	Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth,
ham	playing with limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one bare-breasted,
ham	bare-armed, soot-begrimed workman reading a journal aloud, and of
spam	the others listening to him; of the weapons worn, or laid aside to be
ham	resumed; of the two or three customers fallen forward asleep, who in the
ham	popular high-shouldered shaggy black spencer looked, in that attitude,
spam	like slumbering bears or dogs; the two outlandish customers approached
ham	the counter, and showed what they wanted.
spam	As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in a
ham	corner, and rose to depart. In going, he had to face Miss Pross. No
spam	sooner did he face her, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, and clapped
ham	her hands.
spam	In a moment, the whole company were on their feet. That somebody was
spam	assassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was the
spam	likeliest occurrence. Everybody looked to see somebody fall, but only
spam	saw a man and a woman standing staring at each other; the man with all
spam	the outward aspect of a Frenchman and a thorough Republican; the woman,
ham	evidently English.
spam	What was said in this disappointing anti-climax, by the disciples of the
spam	Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was something very
ham	voluble and loud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldean to Miss
ham	Pross and her protector, though they had been all ears. But, they had no
ham	ears for anything in their surprise. For, it must be recorded, that
spam	not only was Miss Pross lost in amazement and agitation, but,
spam	Mr. Cruncher--though it seemed on his own separate and individual
spam	account--was in a state of the greatest wonder.
ham	"What is the matter?" said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream;
spam	speaking in a vexed, abrupt voice (though in a low tone), and in
ham	English.
ham	"Oh, Solomon, dear Solomon!" cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands again.
ham	"After not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for so long a time,
ham	do I find you here!"
spam	"Don't call me Solomon. Do you want to be the death of me?" asked the
spam	man, in a furtive, frightened way.
ham	"Brother, brother!" cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears. "Have I ever
ham	been so hard with you that you ask me such a cruel question?"
ham	"Then hold your meddlesome tongue," said Solomon, "and come out, if you
ham	want to speak to me. Pay for your wine, and come out. Who's this man?"
spam	Miss Pross, shaking her loving and dejected head at her by no means
ham	affectionate brother, said through her tears, "Mr. Cruncher."
ham	"Let him come out too," said Solomon. "Does he think me a ghost?"
ham	Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks. He said not a
ham	word, however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticule
ham	through her tears with great difficulty paid for her wine. As she did
spam	so, Solomon turned to the followers of the Good Republican Brutus
ham	of Antiquity, and offered a few words of explanation in the French
spam	language, which caused them all to relapse into their former places and
ham	pursuits.
ham	"Now," said Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner, "what do you
spam	want?"
spam	"How dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my love away
ham	from!" cried Miss Pross, "to give me such a greeting, and show me no
spam	affection."
spam	"There. Confound it! There," said Solomon, making a dab at Miss Pross's
ham	lips with his own. "Now are you content?"
spam	Miss Pross only shook her head and wept in silence.
ham	"If you expect me to be surprised," said her brother Solomon, "I am not
ham	surprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who are here. If
ham	you really don't want to endanger my existence--which I half believe you
ham	do--go your ways as soon as possible, and let me go mine. I am busy. I
ham	am an official."
spam	"My English brother Solomon," mourned Miss Pross, casting up her
ham	tear-fraught eyes, "that had the makings in him of one of the best and
ham	greatest of men in his native country, an official among foreigners, and
spam	such foreigners! I would almost sooner have seen the dear boy lying in
spam	his--"
spam	"I said so!" cried her brother, interrupting. "I knew it. You want to be
ham	the death of me. I shall be rendered Suspected, by my own sister. Just
ham	as I am getting on!"
spam	"The gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!" cried Miss Pross. "Far
ham	rather would I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have ever
ham	loved you truly, and ever shall. Say but one affectionate word to me,
ham	and tell me there is nothing angry or estranged between us, and I will
spam	detain you no longer."
spam	Good Miss Pross! As if the estrangement between them had come of any
ham	culpability of hers. As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact, years
spam	ago, in the quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brother had spent
ham	her money and left her!
ham	He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far more grudging
ham	condescension and patronage than he could have shown if their relative
spam	merits and positions had been reversed (which is invariably the case,
spam	all the world over), when Mr. Cruncher, touching him on the shoulder,
spam	hoarsely and unexpectedly interposed with the following singular
spam	question:
spam	"I say! Might I ask the favour? As to whether your name is John Solomon,
ham	or Solomon John?"
ham	The official turned towards him with sudden distrust. He had not
spam	previously uttered a word.
spam	"Come!" said Mr. Cruncher. "Speak out, you know." (Which, by the way,
spam	was more than he could do himself.) "John Solomon, or Solomon John? She
ham	calls you Solomon, and she must know, being your sister. And _I_ know
ham	you're John, you know. Which of the two goes first? And regarding that
spam	name of Pross, likewise. That warn't your name over the water."
spam	"What do you mean?"
ham	"Well, I don't know all I mean, for I can't call to mind what your name
spam	was, over the water."
spam	"No?"
ham	"No. But I'll swear it was a name of two syllables."
ham	"Indeed?"
ham	"Yes. T'other one's was one syllable. I know you. You was a spy--witness
spam	at the Bailey. What, in the name of the Father of Lies, own father to
spam	yourself, was you called at that time?"
ham	"Barsad," said another voice, striking in.
spam	"That's the name for a thousand pound!" cried Jerry.
ham	The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton. He had his hands behind
ham	him under the skirts of his riding-coat, and he stood at Mr. Cruncher's
spam	elbow as negligently as he might have stood at the Old Bailey itself.
spam	"Don't be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross. I arrived at Mr. Lorry's, to his
ham	surprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would not present myself
spam	elsewhere until all was well, or unless I could be useful; I present
ham	myself here, to beg a little talk with your brother. I wish you had a
ham	better employed brother than Mr. Barsad. I wish for your sake Mr. Barsad
ham	was not a Sheep of the Prisons."
ham	Sheep was a cant word of the time for a spy, under the gaolers. The spy,
ham	who was pale, turned paler, and asked him how he dared--
spam	"I'll tell you," said Sydney. "I lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, coming out
spam	of the prison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating the walls,
ham	an hour or more ago. You have a face to be remembered, and I remember
spam	faces well. Made curious by seeing you in that connection, and having
ham	a reason, to which you are no stranger, for associating you with
ham	the misfortunes of a friend now very unfortunate, I walked in your
ham	direction. I walked into the wine-shop here, close after you, and
spam	sat near you. I had no difficulty in deducing from your unreserved
spam	conversation, and the rumour openly going about among your admirers, the
spam	nature of your calling. And gradually, what I had done at random, seemed
spam	to shape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad."
spam	"What purpose?" the spy asked.
ham	"It would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in the
ham	street. Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes of your
ham	company--at the office of Tellson's Bank, for instance?"
spam	"Under a threat?"
spam	"Oh! Did I say that?"
spam	"Then, why should I go there?"
spam	"Really, Mr. Barsad, I can't say, if you can't."
spam	"Do you mean that you won't say, sir?" the spy irresolutely asked.
ham	"You apprehend me very clearly, Mr. Barsad. I won't."
ham	Carton's negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid of his
spam	quickness and skill, in such a business as he had in his secret mind,
spam	and with such a man as he had to do with. His practised eye saw it, and
ham	made the most of it.
ham	"Now, I told you so," said the spy, casting a reproachful look at his
ham	sister; "if any trouble comes of this, it's your doing."
spam	"Come, come, Mr. Barsad!" exclaimed Sydney. "Don't be ungrateful.
ham	But for my great respect for your sister, I might not have led up so
spam	pleasantly to a little proposal that I wish to make for our mutual
ham	satisfaction. Do you go with me to the Bank?"
spam	"I'll hear what you have got to say. Yes, I'll go with you."
spam	"I propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner of her
spam	own street. Let me take your arm, Miss Pross. This is not a good city,
ham	at this time, for you to be out in, unprotected; and as your escort
spam	knows Mr. Barsad, I will invite him to Mr. Lorry's with us. Are we
ham	ready? Come then!"
ham	Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her life
ham	remembered, that as she pressed her hands on Sydney's arm and looked up
spam	in his face, imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was a braced
ham	purpose in the arm and a kind of inspiration in the eyes, which not only
spam	contradicted his light manner, but changed and raised the man. She was
ham	too much occupied then with fears for the brother who so little deserved
ham	her affection, and with Sydney's friendly reassurances, adequately to
ham	heed what she observed.
ham	They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way to Mr.
spam	Lorry's, which was within a few minutes' walk. John Barsad, or Solomon
ham	Pross, walked at his side.
ham	Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before a cheery
ham	little log or two of fire--perhaps looking into their blaze for the
spam	picture of that younger elderly gentleman from Tellson's, who had looked
spam	into the red coals at the Royal George at Dover, now a good many years
ham	ago. He turned his head as they entered, and showed the surprise with
ham	which he saw a stranger.
spam	"Miss Pross's brother, sir," said Sydney. "Mr. Barsad."
ham	"Barsad?" repeated the old gentleman, "Barsad? I have an association
ham	with the name--and with the face."
ham	"I told you you had a remarkable face, Mr. Barsad," observed Carton,
spam	coolly. "Pray sit down."
spam	As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorry wanted,
ham	by saying to him with a frown, "Witness at that trial." Mr. Lorry
spam	immediately remembered, and regarded his new visitor with an undisguised
ham	look of abhorrence.
ham	"Mr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionate
ham	brother you have heard of," said Sydney, "and has acknowledged the
ham	relationship. I pass to worse news. Darnay has been arrested again."
spam	Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, "What do you
spam	tell me! I left him safe and free within these two hours, and am about
ham	to return to him!"
spam	"Arrested for all that. When was it done, Mr. Barsad?"
ham	"Just now, if at all."
spam	"Mr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir," said Sydney, "and I
ham	have it from Mr. Barsad's communication to a friend and brother Sheep
spam	over a bottle of wine, that the arrest has taken place. He left the
ham	messengers at the gate, and saw them admitted by the porter. There is no
ham	earthly doubt that he is retaken."
spam	Mr. Lorry's business eye read in the speaker's face that it was loss
ham	of time to dwell upon the point. Confused, but sensible that something
ham	might depend on his presence of mind, he commanded himself, and was
spam	silently attentive.
ham	"Now, I trust," said Sydney to him, "that the name and influence of
spam	Doctor Manette may stand him in as good stead to-morrow--you said he
spam	would be before the Tribunal again to-morrow, Mr. Barsad?--"
ham	"Yes; I believe so."
ham	"--In as good stead to-morrow as to-day. But it may not be so. I own
spam	to you, I am shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manette's not having had the
ham	power to prevent this arrest."
ham	"He may not have known of it beforehand," said Mr. Lorry.
ham	"But that very circumstance would be alarming, when we remember how
spam	identified he is with his son-in-law."
spam	"That's true," Mr. Lorry acknowledged, with his troubled hand at his
ham	chin, and his troubled eyes on Carton.
spam	"In short," said Sydney, "this is a desperate time, when desperate games
ham	are played for desperate stakes. Let the Doctor play the winning game; I
spam	will play the losing one. No man's life here is worth purchase. Any one
ham	carried home by the people to-day, may be condemned tomorrow. Now, the
ham	stake I have resolved to play for, in case of the worst, is a friend
spam	in the Conciergerie. And the friend I purpose to myself to win, is Mr.
ham	Barsad."
ham	"You need have good cards, sir," said the spy.
spam	"I'll run them over. I'll see what I hold,--Mr. Lorry, you know what a
ham	brute I am; I wish you'd give me a little brandy."
ham	It was put before him, and he drank off a glassful--drank off another
ham	glassful--pushed the bottle thoughtfully away.
spam	"Mr. Barsad," he went on, in the tone of one who really was looking
ham	over a hand at cards: "Sheep of the prisons, emissary of Republican
spam	committees, now turnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secret informer,
ham	so much the more valuable here for being English that an Englishman
ham	is less open to suspicion of subornation in those characters than a
ham	Frenchman, represents himself to his employers under a false name.
ham	That's a very good card. Mr. Barsad, now in the employ of the republican
spam	French government, was formerly in the employ of the aristocratic
ham	English government, the enemy of France and freedom. That's an excellent
spam	card. Inference clear as day in this region of suspicion, that Mr.
spam	Barsad, still in the pay of the aristocratic English government, is the
spam	spy of Pitt, the treacherous foe of the Republic crouching in its bosom,
ham	the English traitor and agent of all mischief so much spoken of and so
spam	difficult to find. That's a card not to be beaten. Have you followed my
ham	hand, Mr. Barsad?"
spam	"Not to understand your play," returned the spy, somewhat uneasily.
spam	"I play my Ace, Denunciation of Mr. Barsad to the nearest Section
spam	Committee. Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what you have. Don't
spam	hurry."
spam	He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy, and
ham	drank it off. He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinking himself
spam	into a fit state for the immediate denunciation of him. Seeing it, he
ham	poured out and drank another glassful.
ham	"Look over your hand carefully, Mr. Barsad. Take time."
ham	It was a poorer hand than he suspected. Mr. Barsad saw losing cards
spam	in it that Sydney Carton knew nothing of. Thrown out of his honourable
ham	employment in England, through too much unsuccessful hard swearing
ham	there--not because he was not wanted there; our English reasons for
ham	vaunting our superiority to secrecy and spies are of very modern
ham	date--he knew that he had crossed the Channel, and accepted service in
ham	France: first, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among his own countrymen
spam	there: gradually, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among the natives. He
ham	knew that under the overthrown government he had been a spy upon Saint
spam	Antoine and Defarge's wine-shop; had received from the watchful police
ham	such heads of information concerning Doctor Manette's imprisonment,
ham	release, and history, as should serve him for an introduction to
ham	familiar conversation with the Defarges; and tried them on Madame
ham	Defarge, and had broken down with them signally. He always remembered
spam	with fear and trembling, that that terrible woman had knitted when he
ham	talked with her, and had looked ominously at him as her fingers moved.
spam	He had since seen her, in the Section of Saint Antoine, over and over
ham	again produce her knitted registers, and denounce people whose lives the
spam	guillotine then surely swallowed up. He knew, as every one employed as
ham	he was did, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that
spam	he was tied fast under the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of
ham	his utmost tergiversation and treachery in furtherance of the reigning
ham	terror, a word might bring it down upon him. Once denounced, and on such
spam	grave grounds as had just now been suggested to his mind, he foresaw
ham	that the dreadful woman of whose unrelenting character he had seen many
ham	proofs, would produce against him that fatal register, and would quash
ham	his last chance of life. Besides that all secret men are men soon
spam	terrified, here were surely cards enough of one black suit, to justify
spam	the holder in growing rather livid as he turned them over.
spam	"You scarcely seem to like your hand," said Sydney, with the greatest
ham	composure. "Do you play?"
spam	"I think, sir," said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned to Mr.
ham	Lorry, "I may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence, to
spam	put it to this other gentleman, so much your junior, whether he can
spam	under any circumstances reconcile it to his station to play that Ace
ham	of which he has spoken. I admit that _I_ am a spy, and that it is
ham	considered a discreditable station--though it must be filled by
spam	somebody; but this gentleman is no spy, and why should he so demean
ham	himself as to make himself one?"
ham	"I play my Ace, Mr. Barsad," said Carton, taking the answer on himself,
spam	and looking at his watch, "without any scruple, in a very few minutes."
ham	"I should have hoped, gentlemen both," said the spy, always striving to
ham	hook Mr. Lorry into the discussion, "that your respect for my sister--"
spam	"I could not better testify my respect for your sister than by finally
spam	relieving her of her brother," said Sydney Carton.
ham	"You think not, sir?"
ham	"I have thoroughly made up my mind about it."
spam	The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with his
ham	ostentatiously rough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour,
spam	received such a check from the inscrutability of Carton,--who was a
ham	mystery to wiser and honester men than he,--that it faltered here and
ham	failed him. While he was at a loss, Carton said, resuming his former air
ham	of contemplating cards:
spam	"And indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that I
spam	have another good card here, not yet enumerated. That friend and
ham	fellow-Sheep, who spoke of himself as pasturing in the country prisons;
ham	who was he?"
spam	"French. You don't know him," said the spy, quickly.
spam	"French, eh?" repeated Carton, musing, and not appearing to notice him
spam	at all, though he echoed his word. "Well; he may be."
spam	"Is, I assure you," said the spy; "though it's not important."
spam	"Though it's not important," repeated Carton, in the same mechanical
spam	way--"though it's not important--No, it's not important. No. Yet I know
spam	the face."
spam	"I think not. I am sure not. It can't be," said the spy.
spam	"It-can't-be," muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idling his
ham	glass (which fortunately was a small one) again. "Can't-be. Spoke good
spam	French. Yet like a foreigner, I thought?"
spam	"Provincial," said the spy.
spam	"No. Foreign!" cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, as a
spam	light broke clearly on his mind. "Cly! Disguised, but the same man. We
ham	had that man before us at the Old Bailey."
ham	"Now, there you are hasty, sir," said Barsad, with a smile that gave his
ham	aquiline nose an extra inclination to one side; "there you really give
spam	me an advantage over you. Cly (who I will unreservedly admit, at this
spam	distance of time, was a partner of mine) has been dead several years. I
spam	attended him in his last illness. He was buried in London, at the church
spam	of Saint Pancras-in-the-Fields. His unpopularity with the blackguard
ham	multitude at the moment prevented my following his remains, but I helped
ham	to lay him in his coffin."
ham	Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkable
spam	goblin shadow on the wall. Tracing it to its source, he discovered it
ham	to be caused by a sudden extraordinary rising and stiffening of all the
ham	risen and stiff hair on Mr. Cruncher's head.
spam	"Let us be reasonable," said the spy, "and let us be fair. To show you
spam	how mistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is, I will
spam	lay before you a certificate of Cly's burial, which I happened to have
spam	carried in my pocket-book," with a hurried hand he produced and opened
ham	it, "ever since. There it is. Oh, look at it, look at it! You may take
ham	it in your hand; it's no forgery."
ham	Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and
spam	Mr. Cruncher rose and stepped forward. His hair could not have been more
spam	violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cow with the
ham	crumpled horn in the house that Jack built.
ham	Unseen by the spy, Mr. Cruncher stood at his side, and touched him on
ham	the shoulder like a ghostly bailiff.
spam	"That there Roger Cly, master," said Mr. Cruncher, with a taciturn and
ham	iron-bound visage. "So _you_ put him in his coffin?"
ham	"I did."
ham	"Who took him out of it?"
ham	Barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, "What do you mean?"
ham	"I mean," said Mr. Cruncher, "that he warn't never in it. No! Not he!
spam	I'll have my head took off, if he was ever in it."
spam	The spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked in
spam	unspeakable astonishment at Jerry.
ham	"I tell you," said Jerry, "that you buried paving-stones and earth in
ham	that there coffin. Don't go and tell me that you buried Cly. It was a
spam	take in. Me and two more knows it."
ham	"How do you know it?"
ham	"What's that to you? Ecod!" growled Mr. Cruncher, "it's you I have got a
spam	old grudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen!
spam	I'd catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea."
spam	Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement at
ham	this turn of the business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderate and
ham	explain himself.
spam	"At another time, sir," he returned, evasively, "the present time is
ham	ill-conwenient for explainin'. What I stand to, is, that he knows well
spam	wot that there Cly was never in that there coffin. Let him say he was,
spam	in so much as a word of one syllable, and I'll either catch hold of his
ham	throat and choke him for half a guinea;" Mr. Cruncher dwelt upon this as
ham	quite a liberal offer; "or I'll out and announce him."
ham	"Humph! I see one thing," said Carton. "I hold another card, Mr. Barsad.
spam	Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion filling the air, for
ham	you to outlive denunciation, when you are in communication with another
spam	aristocratic spy of the same antecedents as yourself, who, moreover, has
ham	the mystery about him of having feigned death and come to life again!
ham	A plot in the prisons, of the foreigner against the Republic. A strong
ham	card--a certain Guillotine card! Do you play?"
spam	"No!" returned the spy. "I throw up. I confess that we were so unpopular
ham	with the outrageous mob, that I only got away from England at the risk
ham	of being ducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted up and down, that
spam	he never would have got away at all but for that sham. Though how this
ham	man knows it was a sham, is a wonder of wonders to me."
spam	"Never you trouble your head about this man," retorted the contentious
spam	Mr. Cruncher; "you'll have trouble enough with giving your attention to
ham	that gentleman. And look here! Once more!"--Mr. Cruncher could not
spam	be restrained from making rather an ostentatious parade of his
ham	liberality--"I'd catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a
spam	guinea."
spam	The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said,
spam	with more decision, "It has come to a point. I go on duty soon, and
ham	can't overstay my time. You told me you had a proposal; what is it?
ham	Now, it is of no use asking too much of me. Ask me to do anything in my
spam	office, putting my head in great extra danger, and I had better trust my
spam	life to the chances of a refusal than the chances of consent. In short,
ham	I should make that choice. You talk of desperation. We are all desperate
spam	here. Remember! I may denounce you if I think proper, and I can swear my
spam	way through stone walls, and so can others. Now, what do you want with
ham	me?"
ham	"Not very much. You are a turnkey at the Conciergerie?"
ham	"I tell you once for all, there is no such thing as an escape possible,"
ham	said the spy, firmly.
spam	"Why need you tell me what I have not asked? You are a turnkey at the
ham	Conciergerie?"
spam	"I am sometimes."
ham	"You can be when you choose?"
ham	"I can pass in and out when I choose."
spam	Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly out
spam	upon the hearth, and watched it as it dropped. It being all spent, he
ham	said, rising:
spam	"So far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well that
ham	the merits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me. Come
ham	into the dark room here, and let us have one final word alone."
ham	IX. The Game Made
spam	While Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in the adjoining
ham	dark room, speaking so low that not a sound was heard, Mr. Lorry looked
spam	at Jerry in considerable doubt and mistrust. That honest tradesman's
spam	manner of receiving the look, did not inspire confidence; he changed the
ham	leg on which he rested, as often as if he had fifty of those limbs,
ham	and were trying them all; he examined his finger-nails with a very
ham	questionable closeness of attention; and whenever Mr. Lorry's eye caught
spam	his, he was taken with that peculiar kind of short cough requiring the
ham	hollow of a hand before it, which is seldom, if ever, known to be an
spam	infirmity attendant on perfect openness of character.
ham	"Jerry," said Mr. Lorry. "Come here."
ham	Mr. Cruncher came forward sideways, with one of his shoulders in advance
spam	of him.
spam	"What have you been, besides a messenger?"
ham	After some cogitation, accompanied with an intent look at his patron,
ham	Mr. Cruncher conceived the luminous idea of replying, "Agicultooral
spam	character."
ham	"My mind misgives me much," said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking a forefinger
ham	at him, "that you have used the respectable and great house of Tellson's
spam	as a blind, and that you have had an unlawful occupation of an infamous
spam	description. If you have, don't expect me to befriend you when you
ham	get back to England. If you have, don't expect me to keep your secret.
ham	Tellson's shall not be imposed upon."
spam	"I hope, sir," pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, "that a gentleman like
ham	yourself wot I've had the honour of odd jobbing till I'm grey at it,
ham	would think twice about harming of me, even if it wos so--I don't say it
spam	is, but even if it wos. And which it is to be took into account that if
spam	it wos, it wouldn't, even then, be all o' one side. There'd be two sides
ham	to it. There might be medical doctors at the present hour, a picking
spam	up their guineas where a honest tradesman don't pick up his
ham	fardens--fardens! no, nor yet his half fardens--half fardens! no, nor
spam	yet his quarter--a banking away like smoke at Tellson's, and a cocking
spam	their medical eyes at that tradesman on the sly, a going in and going
spam	out to their own carriages--ah! equally like smoke, if not more so.
ham	Well, that 'ud be imposing, too, on Tellson's. For you cannot sarse the
ham	goose and not the gander. And here's Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos
ham	in the Old England times, and would be to-morrow, if cause given,
spam	a floppin' again the business to that degree as is ruinating--stark
spam	ruinating! Whereas them medical doctors' wives don't flop--catch 'em at
ham	it! Or, if they flop, their floppings goes in favour of more patients,
spam	and how can you rightly have one without t'other? Then, wot with
ham	undertakers, and wot with parish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot
ham	with private watchmen (all awaricious and all in it), a man wouldn't get
ham	much by it, even if it wos so. And wot little a man did get, would never
ham	prosper with him, Mr. Lorry. He'd never have no good of it; he'd want
ham	all along to be out of the line, if he, could see his way out, being
ham	once in--even if it wos so."
spam	"Ugh!" cried Mr. Lorry, rather relenting, nevertheless, "I am shocked at
spam	the sight of you."
spam	"Now, what I would humbly offer to you, sir," pursued Mr. Cruncher,
spam	"even if it wos so, which I don't say it is--"
spam	"Don't prevaricate," said Mr. Lorry.
ham	"No, I will _not_, sir," returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing were
ham	further from his thoughts or practice--"which I don't say it is--wot I
ham	would humbly offer to you, sir, would be this. Upon that there stool, at
spam	that there Bar, sets that there boy of mine, brought up and growed up to
spam	be a man, wot will errand you, message you, general-light-job you, till
spam	your heels is where your head is, if such should be your wishes. If it
ham	wos so, which I still don't say it is (for I will not prewaricate to
ham	you, sir), let that there boy keep his father's place, and take care of
spam	his mother; don't blow upon that boy's father--do not do it, sir--and
spam	let that father go into the line of the reg'lar diggin', and make amends
ham	for what he would have undug--if it wos so--by diggin' of 'em in with
spam	a will, and with conwictions respectin' the futur' keepin' of 'em safe.
spam	That, Mr. Lorry," said Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his
spam	arm, as an announcement that he had arrived at the peroration of his
ham	discourse, "is wot I would respectfully offer to you, sir. A man don't
spam	see all this here a goin' on dreadful round him, in the way of Subjects
spam	without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring the price down
ham	to porterage and hardly that, without havin' his serious thoughts of
spam	things. And these here would be mine, if it wos so, entreatin' of you
spam	fur to bear in mind that wot I said just now, I up and said in the good
ham	cause when I might have kep' it back."
spam	"That at least is true," said Mr. Lorry. "Say no more now. It may be
spam	that I shall yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent in
ham	action--not in words. I want no more words."
spam	Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spy
spam	returned from the dark room. "Adieu, Mr. Barsad," said the former; "our
spam	arrangement thus made, you have nothing to fear from me."
spam	He sat down in a chair on the hearth, over against Mr. Lorry. When they
spam	were alone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done?
ham	"Not much. If it should go ill with the prisoner, I have ensured access
spam	to him, once."
ham	Mr. Lorry's countenance fell.
spam	"It is all I could do," said Carton. "To propose too much, would be
ham	to put this man's head under the axe, and, as he himself said, nothing
ham	worse could happen to him if he were denounced. It was obviously the
ham	weakness of the position. There is no help for it."
spam	"But access to him," said Mr. Lorry, "if it should go ill before the
spam	Tribunal, will not save him."
spam	"I never said it would."
ham	Mr. Lorry's eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with his
ham	darling, and the heavy disappointment of his second arrest, gradually
spam	weakened them; he was an old man now, overborne with anxiety of late,
ham	and his tears fell.
spam	"You are a good man and a true friend," said Carton, in an altered
spam	voice. "Forgive me if I notice that you are affected. I could not see my
ham	father weep, and sit by, careless. And I could not respect your
spam	sorrow more, if you were my father. You are free from that misfortune,
spam	however."
spam	Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner, there
ham	was a true feeling and respect both in his tone and in his touch,
ham	that Mr. Lorry, who had never seen the better side of him, was wholly
ham	unprepared for. He gave him his hand, and Carton gently pressed it.
spam	"To return to poor Darnay," said Carton. "Don't tell Her of this
ham	interview, or this arrangement. It would not enable Her to go to see
spam	him. She might think it was contrived, in case of the worse, to convey
ham	to him the means of anticipating the sentence."
spam	Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to
ham	see if it were in his mind. It seemed to be; he returned the look, and
ham	evidently understood it.
spam	"She might think a thousand things," Carton said, "and any of them would
ham	only add to her trouble. Don't speak of me to her. As I said to you when
ham	I first came, I had better not see her. I can put my hand out, to do any
ham	little helpful work for her that my hand can find to do, without that.
spam	You are going to her, I hope? She must be very desolate to-night."
spam	"I am going now, directly."
spam	"I am glad of that. She has such a strong attachment to you and reliance
ham	on you. How does she look?"
ham	"Anxious and unhappy, but very beautiful."
ham	"Ah!"
ham	It was a long, grieving sound, like a sigh--almost like a sob. It
spam	attracted Mr. Lorry's eyes to Carton's face, which was turned to the
ham	fire. A light, or a shade (the old gentleman could not have said which),
spam	passed from it as swiftly as a change will sweep over a hill-side on a
ham	wild bright day, and he lifted his foot to put back one of the little
spam	flaming logs, which was tumbling forward. He wore the white riding-coat
ham	and top-boots, then in vogue, and the light of the fire touching their
ham	light surfaces made him look very pale, with his long brown hair,
spam	all untrimmed, hanging loose about him. His indifference to fire was
ham	sufficiently remarkable to elicit a word of remonstrance from Mr. Lorry;
ham	his boot was still upon the hot embers of the flaming log, when it had
spam	broken under the weight of his foot.
ham	"I forgot it," he said.
ham	Mr. Lorry's eyes were again attracted to his face. Taking note of the
ham	wasted air which clouded the naturally handsome features, and having
ham	the expression of prisoners' faces fresh in his mind, he was strongly
ham	reminded of that expression.
ham	"And your duties here have drawn to an end, sir?" said Carton, turning
ham	to him.
ham	"Yes. As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so
spam	unexpectedly, I have at length done all that I can do here. I hoped to
ham	have left them in perfect safety, and then to have quitted Paris. I have
spam	my Leave to Pass. I was ready to go."
spam	They were both silent.
spam	"Yours is a long life to look back upon, sir?" said Carton, wistfully.
spam	"I am in my seventy-eighth year."
spam	"You have been useful all your life; steadily and constantly occupied;
ham	trusted, respected, and looked up to?"
spam	"I have been a man of business, ever since I have been a man. Indeed, I
spam	may say that I was a man of business when a boy."
ham	"See what a place you fill at seventy-eight. How many people will miss
ham	you when you leave it empty!"
spam	"A solitary old bachelor," answered Mr. Lorry, shaking his head. "There
ham	is nobody to weep for me."
ham	"How can you say that? Wouldn't She weep for you? Wouldn't her child?"
spam	"Yes, yes, thank God. I didn't quite mean what I said."
spam	"It _is_ a thing to thank God for; is it not?"
spam	"Surely, surely."
ham	"If you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, to-night,
ham	'I have secured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude or
spam	respect, of no human creature; I have won myself a tender place in no
ham	regard; I have done nothing good or serviceable to be remembered by!'
ham	your seventy-eight years would be seventy-eight heavy curses; would they
spam	not?"
ham	"You say truly, Mr. Carton; I think they would be."
ham	Sydney turned his eyes again upon the fire, and, after a silence of a
ham	few moments, said:
ham	"I should like to ask you:--Does your childhood seem far off? Do the
spam	days when you sat at your mother's knee, seem days of very long ago?"
ham	Responding to his softened manner, Mr. Lorry answered:
ham	"Twenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no. For, as I draw
spam	closer and closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer and
spam	nearer to the beginning. It seems to be one of the kind smoothings and
spam	preparings of the way. My heart is touched now, by many remembrances
ham	that had long fallen asleep, of my pretty young mother (and I so old!),
ham	and by many associations of the days when what we call the World was not
ham	so real with me, and my faults were not confirmed in me."
spam	"I understand the feeling!" exclaimed Carton, with a bright flush. "And
spam	you are the better for it?"
spam	"I hope so."
ham	Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him on with
spam	his outer coat; "But you," said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme, "you
spam	are young."
spam	"Yes," said Carton. "I am not old, but my young way was never the way to
spam	age. Enough of me."
spam	"And of me, I am sure," said Mr. Lorry. "Are you going out?"
ham	"I'll walk with you to her gate. You know my vagabond and restless
ham	habits. If I should prowl about the streets a long time, don't be
spam	uneasy; I shall reappear in the morning. You go to the Court to-morrow?"
spam	"Yes, unhappily."
spam	"I shall be there, but only as one of the crowd. My Spy will find a
spam	place for me. Take my arm, sir."
ham	Mr. Lorry did so, and they went down-stairs and out in the streets. A
spam	few minutes brought them to Mr. Lorry's destination. Carton left him
ham	there; but lingered at a little distance, and turned back to the gate
ham	again when it was shut, and touched it. He had heard of her going to
spam	the prison every day. "She came out here," he said, looking about him,
ham	"turned this way, must have trod on these stones often. Let me follow in
ham	her steps."
spam	It was ten o'clock at night when he stood before the prison of La Force,
spam	where she had stood hundreds of times. A little wood-sawyer, having
ham	closed his shop, was smoking his pipe at his shop-door.
ham	"Good night, citizen," said Sydney Carton, pausing in going by; for, the
spam	man eyed him inquisitively.
spam	"Good night, citizen."
ham	"How goes the Republic?"
ham	"You mean the Guillotine. Not ill. Sixty-three to-day. We shall mount
ham	to a hundred soon. Samson and his men complain sometimes, of being
spam	exhausted. Ha, ha, ha! He is so droll, that Samson. Such a Barber!"
ham	"Do you often go to see him--"
spam	"Shave? Always. Every day. What a barber! You have seen him at work?"
ham	"Never."
ham	"Go and see him when he has a good batch. Figure this to yourself,
spam	citizen; he shaved the sixty-three to-day, in less than two pipes! Less
ham	than two pipes. Word of honour!"
spam	As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, to explain
ham	how he timed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of a rising desire
ham	to strike the life out of him, that he turned away.
spam	"But you are not English," said the wood-sawyer, "though you wear
spam	English dress?"
spam	"Yes," said Carton, pausing again, and answering over his shoulder.
ham	"You speak like a Frenchman."
spam	"I am an old student here."
spam	"Aha, a perfect Frenchman! Good night, Englishman."
ham	"Good night, citizen."
ham	"But go and see that droll dog," the little man persisted, calling after
spam	him. "And take a pipe with you!"
ham	Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middle of
spam	the street under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on a scrap
spam	of paper. Then, traversing with the decided step of one who remembered
spam	the way well, several dark and dirty streets--much dirtier than usual,
ham	for the best public thoroughfares remained uncleansed in those times of
spam	terror--he stopped at a chemist's shop, which the owner was closing with
ham	his own hands. A small, dim, crooked shop, kept in a tortuous, up-hill
ham	thoroughfare, by a small, dim, crooked man.
spam	Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at his
spam	counter, he laid the scrap of paper before him. "Whew!" the chemist
spam	whistled softly, as he read it. "Hi! hi! hi!"
ham	Sydney Carton took no heed, and the chemist said:
spam	"For you, citizen?"
spam	"For me."
spam	"You will be careful to keep them separate, citizen? You know the
ham	consequences of mixing them?"
ham	"Perfectly."
spam	Certain small packets were made and given to him. He put them, one by
ham	one, in the breast of his inner coat, counted out the money for them,
spam	and deliberately left the shop. "There is nothing more to do," said he,
spam	glancing upward at the moon, "until to-morrow. I can't sleep."
spam	It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these words
ham	aloud under the fast-sailing clouds, nor was it more expressive of
ham	negligence than defiance. It was the settled manner of a tired man, who
spam	had wandered and struggled and got lost, but who at length struck into
spam	his road and saw its end.
spam	Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as a
ham	youth of great promise, he had followed his father to the grave. His
ham	mother had died, years before. These solemn words, which had been
spam	read at his father's grave, arose in his mind as he went down the dark
ham	streets, among the heavy shadows, with the moon and the clouds sailing
ham	on high above him. "I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord:
ham	he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and
spam	whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die."
ham	In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrow
ham	rising in him for the sixty-three who had been that day put to death,
spam	and for to-morrow's victims then awaiting their doom in the prisons,
ham	and still of to-morrow's and to-morrow's, the chain of association that
spam	brought the words home, like a rusty old ship's anchor from the deep,
ham	might have been easily found. He did not seek it, but repeated them and
spam	went on.
ham	With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people were
spam	going to rest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrors
ham	surrounding them; in the towers of the churches, where no prayers
spam	were said, for the popular revulsion had even travelled that length
spam	of self-destruction from years of priestly impostors, plunderers, and
spam	profligates; in the distant burial-places, reserved, as they wrote upon
spam	the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding gaols; and in the streets
ham	along which the sixties rolled to a death which had become so common and
ham	material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spirit ever arose among
spam	the people out of all the working of the Guillotine; with a solemn
ham	interest in the whole life and death of the city settling down to its
ham	short nightly pause in fury; Sydney Carton crossed the Seine again for
spam	the lighter streets.
spam	Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to be
spam	suspected, and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put on heavy
ham	shoes, and trudged. But, the theatres were all well filled, and the
ham	people poured cheerfully out as he passed, and went chatting home. At
ham	one of the theatre doors, there was a little girl with a mother, looking
spam	for a way across the street through the mud. He carried the child over,
ham	and before the timid arm was loosed from his neck asked her for a kiss.
ham	"I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth
ham	in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and
ham	believeth in me, shall never die."
spam	Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the words
ham	were in the echoes of his feet, and were in the air. Perfectly calm
spam	and steady, he sometimes repeated them to himself as he walked; but, he
ham	heard them always.
spam	The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to the
spam	water as it splashed the river-walls of the Island of Paris, where the
ham	picturesque confusion of houses and cathedral shone bright in the light
spam	of the moon, the day came coldly, looking like a dead face out of the
ham	sky. Then, the night, with the moon and the stars, turned pale and died,
ham	and for a little while it seemed as if Creation were delivered over to
spam	Death's dominion.
ham	But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, that burden
ham	of the night, straight and warm to his heart in its long bright rays.
ham	And looking along them, with reverently shaded eyes, a bridge of light
ham	appeared to span the air between him and the sun, while the river
spam	sparkled under it.
spam	The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenial
ham	friend, in the morning stillness. He walked by the stream, far from the
ham	houses, and in the light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on the
ham	bank. When he awoke and was afoot again, he lingered there yet a little
spam	longer, watching an eddy that turned and turned purposeless, until the
ham	stream absorbed it, and carried it on to the sea.--"Like me."
ham	A trading-boat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf, then
ham	glided into his view, floated by him, and died away. As its silent track
spam	in the water disappeared, the prayer that had broken up out of his heart
ham	for a merciful consideration of all his poor blindnesses and errors,
ham	ended in the words, "I am the resurrection and the life."
spam	Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy to surmise
spam	where the good old man was gone. Sydney Carton drank nothing but a
spam	little coffee, ate some bread, and, having washed and changed to refresh
spam	himself, went out to the place of trial.
ham	The court was all astir and a-buzz, when the black sheep--whom many fell
spam	away from in dread--pressed him into an obscure corner among the crowd.
spam	Mr. Lorry was there, and Doctor Manette was there. She was there,
spam	sitting beside her father.
spam	When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, so
spam	sustaining, so encouraging, so full of admiring love and pitying
ham	tenderness, yet so courageous for his sake, that it called the healthy
ham	blood into his face, brightened his glance, and animated his heart. If
ham	there had been any eyes to notice the influence of her look, on Sydney
spam	Carton, it would have been seen to be the same influence exactly.
ham	Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order of procedure,
spam	ensuring to any accused person any reasonable hearing. There could have
ham	been no such Revolution, if all laws, forms, and ceremonies, had not
ham	first been so monstrously abused, that the suicidal vengeance of the
spam	Revolution was to scatter them all to the winds.
spam	Every eye was turned to the jury. The same determined patriots and good
ham	republicans as yesterday and the day before, and to-morrow and the day
ham	after. Eager and prominent among them, one man with a craving face, and
ham	his fingers perpetually hovering about his lips, whose appearance
spam	gave great satisfaction to the spectators. A life-thirsting,
ham	cannibal-looking, bloody-minded juryman, the Jacques Three of St.
ham	Antoine. The whole jury, as a jury of dogs empannelled to try the deer.
spam	Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor.
spam	No favourable leaning in that quarter to-day. A fell, uncompromising,
ham	murderous business-meaning there. Every eye then sought some other eye
spam	in the crowd, and gleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded at one
ham	another, before bending forward with a strained attention.
spam	Charles Evremonde, called Darnay. Released yesterday. Reaccused and
spam	retaken yesterday. Indictment delivered to him last night. Suspected and
ham	Denounced enemy of the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family of tyrants,
ham	one of a race proscribed, for that they had used their abolished
ham	privileges to the infamous oppression of the people. Charles Evremonde,
ham	called Darnay, in right of such proscription, absolutely Dead in Law.
spam	To this effect, in as few or fewer words, the Public Prosecutor.
spam	The President asked, was the Accused openly denounced or secretly?
spam	"Openly, President."
spam	"By whom?"
spam	"Three voices. Ernest Defarge, wine-vendor of St. Antoine."
spam	"Good."
ham	"Therese Defarge, his wife."
spam	"Good."
ham	"Alexandre Manette, physician."
ham	A great uproar took place in the court, and in the midst of it, Doctor
ham	Manette was seen, pale and trembling, standing where he had been seated.
spam	"President, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and
spam	a fraud. You know the accused to be the husband of my daughter. My
ham	daughter, and those dear to her, are far dearer to me than my life. Who
spam	and where is the false conspirator who says that I denounce the husband
spam	of my child!"
ham	"Citizen Manette, be tranquil. To fail in submission to the authority of
ham	the Tribunal would be to put yourself out of Law. As to what is dearer
ham	to you than life, nothing can be so dear to a good citizen as the
spam	Republic."
spam	Loud acclamations hailed this rebuke. The President rang his bell, and
spam	with warmth resumed.
ham	"If the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your child
spam	herself, you would have no duty but to sacrifice her. Listen to what is
spam	to follow. In the meanwhile, be silent!"
ham	Frantic acclamations were again raised. Doctor Manette sat down, with
spam	his eyes looking around, and his lips trembling; his daughter drew
ham	closer to him. The craving man on the jury rubbed his hands together,
spam	and restored the usual hand to his mouth.
spam	Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of his
spam	being heard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, and of
ham	his having been a mere boy in the Doctor's service, and of the release,
ham	and of the state of the prisoner when released and delivered to him.
spam	This short examination followed, for the court was quick with its work.
ham	"You did good service at the taking of the Bastille, citizen?"
spam	"I believe so."
spam	Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd: "You were one of the
ham	best patriots there. Why not say so? You were a cannonier that day
spam	there, and you were among the first to enter the accursed fortress when
spam	it fell. Patriots, I speak the truth!"
ham	It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of the audience,
ham	thus assisted the proceedings. The President rang his bell; but, The
spam	Vengeance, warming with encouragement, shrieked, "I defy that bell!"
spam	wherein she was likewise much commended.
ham	"Inform the Tribunal of what you did that day within the Bastille,
ham	citizen."
ham	"I knew," said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at the
ham	bottom of the steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up at him;
spam	"I knew that this prisoner, of whom I speak, had been confined in a cell
ham	known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower. I knew it from himself. He
spam	knew himself by no other name than One Hundred and Five, North Tower,
spam	when he made shoes under my care. As I serve my gun that day, I resolve,
ham	when the place shall fall, to examine that cell. It falls. I mount to
ham	the cell, with a fellow-citizen who is one of the Jury, directed by a
ham	gaoler. I examine it, very closely. In a hole in the chimney, where a
ham	stone has been worked out and replaced, I find a written paper. This is
spam	that written paper. I have made it my business to examine some specimens
ham	of the writing of Doctor Manette. This is the writing of Doctor Manette.
spam	I confide this paper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of
spam	the President."
spam	"Let it be read."
ham	In a dead silence and stillness--the prisoner under trial looking
ham	lovingly at his wife, his wife only looking from him to look with
spam	solicitude at her father, Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed on the
ham	reader, Madame Defarge never taking hers from the prisoner, Defarge
spam	never taking his from his feasting wife, and all the other eyes there
ham	intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of them--the paper was read, as
spam	follows.
spam	X. The Substance of the Shadow
ham	"I, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais, and
spam	afterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in my doleful
spam	cell in the Bastille, during the last month of the year, 1767. I write
spam	it at stolen intervals, under every difficulty. I design to secrete it
spam	in the wall of the chimney, where I have slowly and laboriously made a
ham	place of concealment for it. Some pitying hand may find it there, when I
ham	and my sorrows are dust.
ham	"These words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I write with
ham	difficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney, mixed
ham	with blood, in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity. Hope
spam	has quite departed from my breast. I know from terrible warnings I have
spam	noted in myself that my reason will not long remain unimpaired, but I
ham	solemnly declare that I am at this time in the possession of my right
ham	mind--that my memory is exact and circumstantial--and that I write the
ham	truth as I shall answer for these my last recorded words, whether they
ham	be ever read by men or not, at the Eternal Judgment-seat.
spam	"One cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I think the
ham	twenty-second of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on a retired
spam	part of the quay by the Seine for the refreshment of the frosty air,
ham	at an hour's distance from my place of residence in the Street of the
spam	School of Medicine, when a carriage came along behind me, driven very
spam	fast. As I stood aside to let that carriage pass, apprehensive that it
spam	might otherwise run me down, a head was put out at the window, and a
ham	voice called to the driver to stop.
ham	"The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses,
spam	and the same voice called to me by my name. I answered. The carriage
spam	was then so far in advance of me that two gentlemen had time to open the
ham	door and alight before I came up with it.
ham	"I observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared to
ham	conceal themselves. As they stood side by side near the carriage door,
spam	I also observed that they both looked of about my own age, or rather
ham	younger, and that they were greatly alike, in stature, manner, voice,
ham	and (as far as I could see) face too.
spam	"'You are Doctor Manette?' said one.
ham	"I am."
ham	"'Doctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,' said the other; 'the young
spam	physician, originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year or two
spam	has made a rising reputation in Paris?'
spam	"'Gentlemen,' I returned, 'I am that Doctor Manette of whom you speak so
ham	graciously.'
ham	"'We have been to your residence,' said the first, 'and not being
ham	so fortunate as to find you there, and being informed that you were
ham	probably walking in this direction, we followed, in the hope of
spam	overtaking you. Will you please to enter the carriage?'
ham	"The manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as these words
ham	were spoken, so as to place me between themselves and the carriage door.
spam	They were armed. I was not.
spam	"'Gentlemen,' said I, 'pardon me; but I usually inquire who does me
spam	the honour to seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the case to
ham	which I am summoned.'
ham	"The reply to this was made by him who had spoken second. 'Doctor,
ham	your clients are people of condition. As to the nature of the case,
spam	our confidence in your skill assures us that you will ascertain it for
ham	yourself better than we can describe it. Enough. Will you please to
ham	enter the carriage?'
ham	"I could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence. They both
ham	entered after me--the last springing in, after putting up the steps. The
spam	carriage turned about, and drove on at its former speed.
ham	"I repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred. I have no doubt that
ham	it is, word for word, the same. I describe everything exactly as it took
ham	place, constraining my mind not to wander from the task. Where I make
ham	the broken marks that follow here, I leave off for the time, and put my
ham	paper in its hiding-place.
spam	        *****
ham	"The carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, and
spam	emerged upon the country road. At two-thirds of a league from the
ham	Barrier--I did not estimate the distance at that time, but afterwards
spam	when I traversed it--it struck out of the main avenue, and presently
spam	stopped at a solitary house, We all three alighted, and walked, by
spam	a damp soft footpath in a garden where a neglected fountain had
spam	overflowed, to the door of the house. It was not opened immediately, in
ham	answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two conductors struck
ham	the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across the face.
ham	"There was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention,
ham	for I had seen common people struck more commonly than dogs. But, the
ham	other of the two, being angry likewise, struck the man in like manner
spam	with his arm; the look and bearing of the brothers were then so exactly
ham	alike, that I then first perceived them to be twin brothers.
spam	"From the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we found
ham	locked, and which one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and had
ham	relocked), I had heard cries proceeding from an upper chamber. I was
ham	conducted to this chamber straight, the cries growing louder as we
spam	ascended the stairs, and I found a patient in a high fever of the brain,
ham	lying on a bed.
ham	"The patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly not much
ham	past twenty. Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were bound to
spam	her sides with sashes and handkerchiefs. I noticed that these bonds were
ham	all portions of a gentleman's dress. On one of them, which was a fringed
ham	scarf for a dress of ceremony, I saw the armorial bearings of a Noble,
ham	and the letter E.
ham	"I saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of the patient;
ham	for, in her restless strivings she had turned over on her face on the
spam	edge of the bed, had drawn the end of the scarf into her mouth, and was
ham	in danger of suffocation. My first act was to put out my hand to relieve
ham	her breathing; and in moving the scarf aside, the embroidery in the
ham	corner caught my sight.
spam	"I turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calm her
spam	and keep her down, and looked into her face. Her eyes were dilated and
spam	wild, and she constantly uttered piercing shrieks, and repeated the
spam	words, 'My husband, my father, and my brother!' and then counted up to
ham	twelve, and said, 'Hush!' For an instant, and no more, she would pause
ham	to listen, and then the piercing shrieks would begin again, and she
ham	would repeat the cry, 'My husband, my father, and my brother!' and
spam	would count up to twelve, and say, 'Hush!' There was no variation in the
ham	order, or the manner. There was no cessation, but the regular moment's
spam	pause, in the utterance of these sounds.
spam	"'How long,' I asked, 'has this lasted?'
ham	"To distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and the
ham	younger; by the elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority. It
spam	was the elder who replied, 'Since about this hour last night.'
ham	"'She has a husband, a father, and a brother?'
spam	"'A brother.'
spam	"'I do not address her brother?'
spam	"He answered with great contempt, 'No.'
ham	"'She has some recent association with the number twelve?'
spam	"The younger brother impatiently rejoined, 'With twelve o'clock?'
ham	"'See, gentlemen,' said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast, 'how
ham	useless I am, as you have brought me! If I had known what I was coming
ham	to see, I could have come provided. As it is, time must be lost. There
ham	are no medicines to be obtained in this lonely place.'
spam	"The elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, 'There is
spam	a case of medicines here;' and brought it from a closet, and put it on
ham	the table.
ham	        *****
ham	"I opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to my
ham	lips. If I had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines that were
spam	poisons in themselves, I would not have administered any of those.
ham	"'Do you doubt them?' asked the younger brother.
ham	"'You see, monsieur, I am going to use them,' I replied, and said no
spam	more.
spam	"I made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after many
spam	efforts, the dose that I desired to give. As I intended to repeat it
ham	after a while, and as it was necessary to watch its influence, I then
spam	sat down by the side of the bed. There was a timid and suppressed woman
spam	in attendance (wife of the man down-stairs), who had retreated into
spam	a corner. The house was damp and decayed, indifferently
spam	furnished--evidently, recently occupied and temporarily used. Some thick
ham	old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, to deaden the
ham	sound of the shrieks. They continued to be uttered in their regular
spam	succession, with the cry, 'My husband, my father, and my brother!' the
ham	counting up to twelve, and 'Hush!' The frenzy was so violent, that I had
spam	not unfastened the bandages restraining the arms; but, I had looked to
spam	them, to see that they were not painful. The only spark of encouragement
spam	in the case, was, that my hand upon the sufferer's breast had this much
spam	soothing influence, that for minutes at a time it tranquillised the
ham	figure. It had no effect upon the cries; no pendulum could be more
ham	regular.
ham	"For the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat by
spam	the side of the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers looking on,
ham	before the elder said:
ham	"'There is another patient.'
ham	"I was startled, and asked, 'Is it a pressing case?'
spam	"'You had better see,' he carelessly answered; and took up a light.
spam	        *****
ham	"The other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase, which
ham	was a species of loft over a stable. There was a low plastered ceiling
ham	to a part of it; the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiled roof, and
spam	there were beams across. Hay and straw were stored in that portion of
ham	the place, fagots for firing, and a heap of apples in sand. I had to
spam	pass through that part, to get at the other. My memory is circumstantial
spam	and unshaken. I try it with these details, and I see them all, in
spam	this my cell in the Bastille, near the close of the tenth year of my
ham	captivity, as I saw them all that night.
spam	"On some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, lay a
spam	handsome peasant boy--a boy of not more than seventeen at the most.
ham	He lay on his back, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched on his
spam	breast, and his glaring eyes looking straight upward. I could not see
ham	where his wound was, as I kneeled on one knee over him; but, I could see
spam	that he was dying of a wound from a sharp point.
spam	"'I am a doctor, my poor fellow,' said I. 'Let me examine it.'
ham	"'I do not want it examined,' he answered; 'let it be.'
spam	"It was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his hand away.
ham	The wound was a sword-thrust, received from twenty to twenty-four hours
spam	before, but no skill could have saved him if it had been looked to
ham	without delay. He was then dying fast. As I turned my eyes to the elder
spam	brother, I saw him looking down at this handsome boy whose life was
spam	ebbing out, as if he were a wounded bird, or hare, or rabbit; not at all
spam	as if he were a fellow-creature.
ham	"'How has this been done, monsieur?' said I.
spam	"'A crazed young common dog! A serf! Forced my brother to draw upon him,
ham	and has fallen by my brother's sword--like a gentleman.'
ham	"There was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in this
spam	answer. The speaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenient to
spam	have that different order of creature dying there, and that it would
ham	have been better if he had died in the usual obscure routine of his
spam	vermin kind. He was quite incapable of any compassionate feeling about
ham	the boy, or about his fate.
spam	"The boy's eyes had slowly moved to him as he had spoken, and they now
spam	slowly moved to me.
ham	"'Doctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs are
ham	proud too, sometimes. They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us; but
spam	we have a little pride left, sometimes. She--have you seen her, Doctor?'
spam	"The shrieks and the cries were audible there, though subdued by the
ham	distance. He referred to them, as if she were lying in our presence.
spam	"I said, 'I have seen her.'
spam	"'She is my sister, Doctor. They have had their shameful rights, these
ham	Nobles, in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years, but we
ham	have had good girls among us. I know it, and have heard my father say
ham	so. She was a good girl. She was betrothed to a good young man, too: a
ham	tenant of his. We were all tenants of his--that man's who stands there.
spam	The other is his brother, the worst of a bad race.'
ham	"It was with the greatest difficulty that the boy gathered bodily force
spam	to speak; but, his spirit spoke with a dreadful emphasis.
spam	"'We were so robbed by that man who stands there, as all we common dogs
spam	are by those superior Beings--taxed by him without mercy, obliged to
spam	work for him without pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill, obliged
ham	to feed scores of his tame birds on our wretched crops, and forbidden
ham	for our lives to keep a single tame bird of our own, pillaged and
ham	plundered to that degree that when we chanced to have a bit of meat, we
ham	ate it in fear, with the door barred and the shutters closed, that his
spam	people should not see it and take it from us--I say, we were so robbed,
ham	and hunted, and were made so poor, that our father told us it was a
spam	dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, and that what we should
ham	most pray for, was, that our women might be barren and our miserable
ham	race die out!'
ham	"I had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forth
ham	like a fire. I had supposed that it must be latent in the people
ham	somewhere; but, I had never seen it break out, until I saw it in the
ham	dying boy.
ham	"'Nevertheless, Doctor, my sister married. He was ailing at that time,
spam	poor fellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend and comfort
spam	him in our cottage--our dog-hut, as that man would call it. She had not
ham	been married many weeks, when that man's brother saw her and admired
ham	her, and asked that man to lend her to him--for what are husbands among
spam	us! He was willing enough, but my sister was good and virtuous, and
spam	hated his brother with a hatred as strong as mine. What did the two
spam	then, to persuade her husband to use his influence with her, to make her
ham	willing?'
spam	"The boy's eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to the
spam	looker-on, and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true. The two
spam	opposing kinds of pride confronting one another, I can see, even in this
spam	Bastille; the gentleman's, all negligent indifference; the peasant's, all
spam	trodden-down sentiment, and passionate revenge.
ham	"'You know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles to
ham	harness us common dogs to carts, and drive us. They so harnessed him and
spam	drove him. You know that it is among their Rights to keep us in their
ham	grounds all night, quieting the frogs, in order that their noble sleep
spam	may not be disturbed. They kept him out in the unwholesome mists at
ham	night, and ordered him back into his harness in the day. But he was
ham	not persuaded. No! Taken out of harness one day at noon, to feed--if he
spam	could find food--he sobbed twelve times, once for every stroke of the
ham	bell, and died on her bosom.'
ham	"Nothing human could have held life in the boy but his determination to
spam	tell all his wrong. He forced back the gathering shadows of death, as
spam	he forced his clenched right hand to remain clenched, and to cover his
spam	wound.
ham	"'Then, with that man's permission and even with his aid, his
ham	brother took her away; in spite of what I know she must have told his
ham	brother--and what that is, will not be long unknown to you, Doctor, if
ham	it is now--his brother took her away--for his pleasure and diversion,
spam	for a little while. I saw her pass me on the road. When I took the
ham	tidings home, our father's heart burst; he never spoke one of the words
spam	that filled it. I took my young sister (for I have another) to a place
spam	beyond the reach of this man, and where, at least, she will never be
ham	_his_ vassal. Then, I tracked the brother here, and last night climbed
ham	in--a common dog, but sword in hand.--Where is the loft window? It was
spam	somewhere here?'
ham	"The room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing around
ham	him. I glanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw were trampled
ham	over the floor, as if there had been a struggle.
ham	"'She heard me, and ran in. I told her not to come near us till he was
ham	dead. He came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; then struck
ham	at me with a whip. But I, though a common dog, so struck at him as to
spam	make him draw. Let him break into as many pieces as he will, the sword
ham	that he stained with my common blood; he drew to defend himself--thrust
spam	at me with all his skill for his life.'
spam	"My glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments of
spam	a broken sword, lying among the hay. That weapon was a gentleman's. In
ham	another place, lay an old sword that seemed to have been a soldier's.
ham	"'Now, lift me up, Doctor; lift me up. Where is he?'
spam	"'He is not here,' I said, supporting the boy, and thinking that he
ham	referred to the brother.
ham	"'He! Proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me. Where is the
spam	man who was here? Turn my face to him.'
spam	"I did so, raising the boy's head against my knee. But, invested for the
spam	moment with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely: obliging
ham	me to rise too, or I could not have still supported him.
ham	"'Marquis,' said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide, and
ham	his right hand raised, 'in the days when all these things are to be
ham	answered for, I summon you and yours, to the last of your bad race, to
ham	answer for them. I mark this cross of blood upon you, as a sign that
ham	I do it. In the days when all these things are to be answered for,
ham	I summon your brother, the worst of the bad race, to answer for them
ham	separately. I mark this cross of blood upon him, as a sign that I do
spam	it.'
spam	"Twice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with his
spam	forefinger drew a cross in the air. He stood for an instant with the
spam	finger yet raised, and as it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laid him
ham	down dead.
ham	        *****
spam	"When I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found her raving
spam	in precisely the same order of continuity. I knew that this might last
spam	for many hours, and that it would probably end in the silence of the
ham	grave.
spam	"I repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side of
ham	the bed until the night was far advanced. She never abated the piercing
spam	quality of her shrieks, never stumbled in the distinctness or the order
ham	of her words. They were always 'My husband, my father, and my brother!
spam	One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven,
ham	twelve. Hush!'
ham	"This lasted twenty-six hours from the time when I first saw her. I had
spam	come and gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she began to
ham	falter. I did what little could be done to assist that opportunity, and
spam	by-and-bye she sank into a lethargy, and lay like the dead.
ham	"It was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long and
spam	fearful storm. I released her arms, and called the woman to assist me to
ham	compose her figure and the dress she had torn. It was then that I knew
spam	her condition to be that of one in whom the first expectations of being
spam	a mother have arisen; and it was then that I lost the little hope I had
ham	had of her.
spam	"'Is she dead?' asked the Marquis, whom I will still describe as the
ham	elder brother, coming booted into the room from his horse.
ham	"'Not dead,' said I; 'but like to die.'
spam	"'What strength there is in these common bodies!' he said, looking down
ham	at her with some curiosity.
spam	"'There is prodigious strength,' I answered him, 'in sorrow and
ham	despair.'
ham	"He first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them. He moved a
spam	chair with his foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said in a
ham	subdued voice,
ham	"'Doctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds, I
ham	recommended that your aid should be invited. Your reputation is high,
ham	and, as a young man with your fortune to make, you are probably mindful
spam	of your interest. The things that you see here, are things to be seen,
spam	and not spoken of.'
ham	"I listened to the patient's breathing, and avoided answering.
spam	"'Do you honour me with your attention, Doctor?'
spam	"'Monsieur,' said I, 'in my profession, the communications of patients
spam	are always received in confidence.' I was guarded in my answer, for I
spam	was troubled in my mind with what I had heard and seen.
spam	"Her breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried the
spam	pulse and the heart. There was life, and no more. Looking round as I
ham	resumed my seat, I found both the brothers intent upon me.
spam	        *****
ham	"I write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am so
ham	fearful of being detected and consigned to an underground cell and total
ham	darkness, that I must abridge this narrative. There is no confusion or
spam	failure in my memory; it can recall, and could detail, every word that
spam	was ever spoken between me and those brothers.
spam	"She lingered for a week. Towards the last, I could understand some few
spam	syllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips. She
spam	asked me where she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her. It
ham	was in vain that I asked her for her family name. She faintly shook her
ham	head upon the pillow, and kept her secret, as the boy had done.
spam	"I had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had told the
ham	brothers she was sinking fast, and could not live another day. Until
spam	then, though no one was ever presented to her consciousness save the
spam	woman and myself, one or other of them had always jealously sat behind
ham	the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there. But when it came to
ham	that, they seemed careless what communication I might hold with her; as
spam	if--the thought passed through my mind--I were dying too.
ham	"I always observed that their pride bitterly resented the younger
ham	brother's (as I call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, and that
spam	peasant a boy. The only consideration that appeared to affect the mind
spam	of either of them was the consideration that this was highly degrading
ham	to the family, and was ridiculous. As often as I caught the younger
spam	brother's eyes, their expression reminded me that he disliked me deeply,
ham	for knowing what I knew from the boy. He was smoother and more polite to
spam	me than the elder; but I saw this. I also saw that I was an incumbrance
ham	in the mind of the elder, too.
ham	"My patient died, two hours before midnight--at a time, by my watch,
spam	answering almost to the minute when I had first seen her. I was alone
ham	with her, when her forlorn young head drooped gently on one side, and
spam	all her earthly wrongs and sorrows ended.
spam	"The brothers were waiting in a room down-stairs, impatient to ride
spam	away. I had heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their boots with
ham	their riding-whips, and loitering up and down.
spam	"'At last she is dead?' said the elder, when I went in.
ham	"'She is dead,' said I.
ham	"'I congratulate you, my brother,' were his words as he turned round.
spam	"He had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking. He now
spam	gave me a rouleau of gold. I took it from his hand, but laid it on
ham	the table. I had considered the question, and had resolved to accept
ham	nothing.
spam	"'Pray excuse me,' said I. 'Under the circumstances, no.'
spam	"They exchanged looks, but bent their heads to me as I bent mine to
spam	them, and we parted without another word on either side.
ham	        *****
ham	"I am weary, weary, weary--worn down by misery. I cannot read what I
spam	have written with this gaunt hand.
spam	"Early in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in a
ham	little box, with my name on the outside. From the first, I had anxiously
ham	considered what I ought to do. I decided, that day, to write privately
spam	to the Minister, stating the nature of the two cases to which I had been
ham	summoned, and the place to which I had gone: in effect, stating all the
ham	circumstances. I knew what Court influence was, and what the immunities
ham	of the Nobles were, and I expected that the matter would never be
ham	heard of; but, I wished to relieve my own mind. I had kept the matter a
ham	profound secret, even from my wife; and this, too, I resolved to state
spam	in my letter. I had no apprehension whatever of my real danger; but
spam	I was conscious that there might be danger for others, if others were
spam	compromised by possessing the knowledge that I possessed.
spam	"I was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter that
ham	night. I rose long before my usual time next morning to finish it.
spam	It was the last day of the year. The letter was lying before me just
ham	completed, when I was told that a lady waited, who wished to see me.
spam	        *****
ham	"I am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself. It is
spam	so cold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom upon me is so
spam	dreadful.
spam	"The lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for long
ham	life. She was in great agitation. She presented herself to me as the
spam	wife of the Marquis St. Evremonde. I connected the title by which the
ham	boy had addressed the elder brother, with the initial letter embroidered
ham	on the scarf, and had no difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that I
ham	had seen that nobleman very lately.
spam	"My memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of our
ham	conversation. I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was, and I
ham	know not at what times I may be watched. She had in part suspected, and
spam	in part discovered, the main facts of the cruel story, of her husband's
ham	share in it, and my being resorted to. She did not know that the girl
ham	was dead. Her hope had been, she said in great distress, to show her,
spam	in secret, a woman's sympathy. Her hope had been to avert the wrath of
spam	Heaven from a House that had long been hateful to the suffering many.
ham	"She had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living, and
ham	her greatest desire was, to help that sister. I could tell her nothing
spam	but that there was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing. Her
spam	inducement to come to me, relying on my confidence, had been the hope
ham	that I could tell her the name and place of abode. Whereas, to this
ham	wretched hour I am ignorant of both.
spam	        *****
ham	"These scraps of paper fail me. One was taken from me, with a warning,
spam	yesterday. I must finish my record to-day.
ham	"She was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage. How
spam	could she be! The brother distrusted and disliked her, and his influence
spam	was all opposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and in dread of her
spam	husband too. When I handed her down to the door, there was a child, a
spam	pretty boy from two to three years old, in her carriage.
ham	"'For his sake, Doctor,' she said, pointing to him in tears, 'I would do
spam	all I can to make what poor amends I can. He will never prosper in his
spam	inheritance otherwise. I have a presentiment that if no other innocent
spam	atonement is made for this, it will one day be required of him. What
spam	I have left to call my own--it is little beyond the worth of a few
spam	jewels--I will make it the first charge of his life to bestow, with the
ham	compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on this injured family, if
ham	the sister can be discovered.'
ham	"She kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, 'It is for thine own dear
ham	sake. Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?' The child answered her
spam	bravely, 'Yes!' I kissed her hand, and she took him in her arms, and
spam	went away caressing him. I never saw her more.
spam	"As she had mentioned her husband's name in the faith that I knew it,
spam	I added no mention of it to my letter. I sealed my letter, and, not
spam	trusting it out of my own hands, delivered it myself that day.
spam	"That night, the last night of the year, towards nine o'clock, a man in
ham	a black dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softly followed
spam	my servant, Ernest Defarge, a youth, up-stairs. When my servant came
ham	into the room where I sat with my wife--O my wife, beloved of my heart!
spam	My fair young English wife!--we saw the man, who was supposed to be at
ham	the gate, standing silent behind him.
ham	"An urgent case in the Rue St. Honore, he said. It would not detain me,
spam	he had a coach in waiting.
spam	"It brought me here, it brought me to my grave. When I was clear of the
ham	house, a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth from behind, and
spam	my arms were pinioned. The two brothers crossed the road from a dark
spam	corner, and identified me with a single gesture. The Marquis took from
ham	his pocket the letter I had written, showed it me, burnt it in the light
spam	of a lantern that was held, and extinguished the ashes with his foot.
ham	Not a word was spoken. I was brought here, I was brought to my living
spam	grave.
spam	"If it had pleased _God_ to put it in the hard heart of either of the
spam	brothers, in all these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of
ham	my dearest wife--so much as to let me know by a word whether alive or
spam	dead--I might have thought that He had not quite abandoned them. But,
spam	now I believe that the mark of the red cross is fatal to them, and that
ham	they have no part in His mercies. And them and their descendants, to the
ham	last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappy prisoner, do this last
ham	night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony, denounce to the times
spam	when all these things shall be answered for. I denounce them to Heaven
spam	and to earth."
spam	A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done. A
ham	sound of craving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it but
spam	blood. The narrative called up the most revengeful passions of the time,
ham	and there was not a head in the nation but must have dropped before it.
spam	Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to show
spam	how the Defarges had not made the paper public, with the other captured
spam	Bastille memorials borne in procession, and had kept it, biding their
ham	time. Little need to show that this detested family name had long been
spam	anathematised by Saint Antoine, and was wrought into the fatal register.
ham	The man never trod ground whose virtues and services would have
spam	sustained him in that place that day, against such denunciation.
ham	And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was a
ham	well-known citizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife. One
ham	of the frenzied aspirations of the populace was, for imitations of
ham	the questionable public virtues of antiquity, and for sacrifices and
spam	self-immolations on the people's altar. Therefore when the President
spam	said (else had his own head quivered on his shoulders), that the good
ham	physician of the Republic would deserve better still of the Republic by
spam	rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, and would doubtless feel
spam	a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter a widow and her child an
ham	orphan, there was wild excitement, patriotic fervour, not a touch of
ham	human sympathy.
spam	"Much influence around him, has that Doctor?" murmured Madame Defarge,
spam	smiling to The Vengeance. "Save him now, my Doctor, save him!"
spam	At every juryman's vote, there was a roar. Another and another. Roar and
spam	roar.
spam	Unanimously voted. At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemy
spam	of the Republic, a notorious oppressor of the People. Back to the
spam	Conciergerie, and Death within four-and-twenty hours!
spam	XI. Dusk
ham	The wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell under
ham	the sentence, as if she had been mortally stricken. But, she uttered no
spam	sound; and so strong was the voice within her, representing that it was
spam	she of all the world who must uphold him in his misery and not augment
ham	it, that it quickly raised her, even from that shock.
spam	The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out of doors,
spam	the Tribunal adjourned. The quick noise and movement of the court's
spam	emptying itself by many passages had not ceased, when Lucie stood
spam	stretching out her arms towards her husband, with nothing in her face
spam	but love and consolation.
ham	"If I might touch him! If I might embrace him once! O, good citizens, if
ham	you would have so much compassion for us!"
ham	There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who had
spam	taken him last night, and Barsad. The people had all poured out to the
ham	show in the streets. Barsad proposed to the rest, "Let her embrace
ham	him then; it is but a moment." It was silently acquiesced in, and they
spam	passed her over the seats in the hall to a raised place, where he, by
ham	leaning over the dock, could fold her in his arms.
spam	"Farewell, dear darling of my soul. My parting blessing on my love. We
ham	shall meet again, where the weary are at rest!"
ham	They were her husband's words, as he held her to his bosom.
spam	"I can bear it, dear Charles. I am supported from above: don't suffer
spam	for me. A parting blessing for our child."
ham	"I send it to her by you. I kiss her by you. I say farewell to her by
spam	you."
spam	"My husband. No! A moment!" He was tearing himself apart from her.
ham	"We shall not be separated long. I feel that this will break my heart
ham	by-and-bye; but I will do my duty while I can, and when I leave her, God
ham	will raise up friends for her, as He did for me."
spam	Her father had followed her, and would have fallen on his knees to both
spam	of them, but that Darnay put out a hand and seized him, crying:
ham	"No, no! What have you done, what have you done, that you should kneel
ham	to us! We know now, what a struggle you made of old. We know, now what
spam	you underwent when you suspected my descent, and when you knew it. We
ham	know now, the natural antipathy you strove against, and conquered, for
spam	her dear sake. We thank you with all our hearts, and all our love and
spam	duty. Heaven be with you!"
ham	Her father's only answer was to draw his hands through his white hair,
ham	and wring them with a shriek of anguish.
ham	"It could not be otherwise," said the prisoner. "All things have worked
spam	together as they have fallen out. It was the always-vain endeavour to
ham	discharge my poor mother's trust that first brought my fatal presence
ham	near you. Good could never come of such evil, a happier end was not in
spam	nature to so unhappy a beginning. Be comforted, and forgive me. Heaven
spam	bless you!"
ham	As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking after him
spam	with her hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer, and
spam	with a radiant look upon her face, in which there was even a comforting
spam	smile. As he went out at the prisoners' door, she turned, laid her head
ham	lovingly on her father's breast, tried to speak to him, and fell at his
ham	feet.
ham	Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved,
ham	Sydney Carton came and took her up. Only her father and Mr. Lorry were
spam	with her. His arm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head.
spam	Yet, there was an air about him that was not all of pity--that had a
ham	flush of pride in it.
spam	"Shall I take her to a coach? I shall never feel her weight."
ham	He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in a
spam	coach. Her father and their old friend got into it, and he took his seat
spam	beside the driver.
ham	When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark not
spam	many hours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stones of
ham	the street her feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carried her up
ham	the staircase to their rooms. There, he laid her down on a couch, where
ham	her child and Miss Pross wept over her.
ham	"Don't recall her to herself," he said, softly, to the latter, "she is
ham	better so. Don't revive her to consciousness, while she only faints."
spam	"Oh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!" cried little Lucie, springing up and
ham	throwing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief. "Now that
spam	you have come, I think you will do something to help mamma, something to
spam	save papa! O, look at her, dear Carton! Can you, of all the people who
ham	love her, bear to see her so?"
spam	He bent over the child, and laid her blooming cheek against his face. He
ham	put her gently from him, and looked at her unconscious mother.
spam	"Before I go," he said, and paused--"I may kiss her?"
ham	It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched her face
spam	with his lips, he murmured some words. The child, who was nearest to
spam	him, told them afterwards, and told her grandchildren when she was a
ham	handsome old lady, that she heard him say, "A life you love."
ham	When he had gone out into the next room, he turned suddenly on Mr. Lorry
ham	and her father, who were following, and said to the latter:
ham	"You had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it at least
spam	be tried. These judges, and all the men in power, are very friendly to
ham	you, and very recognisant of your services; are they not?"
spam	"Nothing connected with Charles was concealed from me. I had the
ham	strongest assurances that I should save him; and I did." He returned the
spam	answer in great trouble, and very slowly.
ham	"Try them again. The hours between this and to-morrow afternoon are few
ham	and short, but try."
ham	"I intend to try. I will not rest a moment."
spam	"That's well. I have known such energy as yours do great things before
spam	now--though never," he added, with a smile and a sigh together, "such
spam	great things as this. But try! Of little worth as life is when we misuse
spam	it, it is worth that effort. It would cost nothing to lay down if it
ham	were not."
spam	"I will go," said Doctor Manette, "to the Prosecutor and the President
ham	straight, and I will go to others whom it is better not to name. I will
spam	write too, and--But stay! There is a Celebration in the streets, and no
spam	one will be accessible until dark."
spam	"That's true. Well! It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not much the
ham	forlorner for being delayed till dark. I should like to know how you
spam	speed; though, mind! I expect nothing! When are you likely to have seen
ham	these dread powers, Doctor Manette?"
ham	"Immediately after dark, I should hope. Within an hour or two from
ham	this."
spam	"It will be dark soon after four. Let us stretch the hour or two. If I
ham	go to Mr. Lorry's at nine, shall I hear what you have done, either from
ham	our friend or from yourself?"
ham	"Yes."
ham	"May you prosper!"
spam	Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door, and, touching him on the
spam	shoulder as he was going away, caused him to turn.
ham	"I have no hope," said Mr. Lorry, in a low and sorrowful whisper.
spam	"Nor have I."
ham	"If any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to spare
ham	him--which is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any man's
ham	to them!--I doubt if they durst spare him after the demonstration in the
ham	court."
ham	"And so do I. I heard the fall of the axe in that sound."
ham	Mr. Lorry leaned his arm upon the door-post, and bowed his face upon it.
ham	"Don't despond," said Carton, very gently; "don't grieve. I encouraged
spam	Doctor Manette in this idea, because I felt that it might one day be
spam	consolatory to her. Otherwise, she might think 'his life was wantonly
ham	thrown away or wasted,' and that might trouble her."
ham	"Yes, yes, yes," returned Mr. Lorry, drying his eyes, "you are right.
ham	But he will perish; there is no real hope."
spam	"Yes. He will perish: there is no real hope," echoed Carton.
ham	And walked with a settled step, down-stairs.
ham	XII. Darkness
ham	Sydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go. "At
spam	Tellson's banking-house at nine," he said, with a musing face. "Shall I
spam	do well, in the mean time, to show myself? I think so. It is best that
spam	these people should know there is such a man as I here; it is a sound
spam	precaution, and may be a necessary preparation. But care, care, care!
spam	Let me think it out!"
ham	Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he took a
spam	turn or two in the already darkening street, and traced the thought
ham	in his mind to its possible consequences. His first impression was
ham	confirmed. "It is best," he said, finally resolved, "that these people
ham	should know there is such a man as I here." And he turned his face
ham	towards Saint Antoine.
spam	Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wine-shop in
ham	the Saint Antoine suburb. It was not difficult for one who knew the city
ham	well, to find his house without asking any question. Having ascertained
ham	its situation, Carton came out of those closer streets again, and dined
spam	at a place of refreshment and fell sound asleep after dinner. For the
spam	first time in many years, he had no strong drink. Since last night he
spam	had taken nothing but a little light thin wine, and last night he had
spam	dropped the brandy slowly down on Mr. Lorry's hearth like a man who had
spam	done with it.
ham	It was as late as seven o'clock when he awoke refreshed, and went out
spam	into the streets again. As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, he
spam	stopped at a shop-window where there was a mirror, and slightly altered
spam	the disordered arrangement of his loose cravat, and his coat-collar, and
ham	his wild hair. This done, he went on direct to Defarge's, and went in.
ham	There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three, of the
ham	restless fingers and the croaking voice. This man, whom he had seen upon
spam	the Jury, stood drinking at the little counter, in conversation with the
spam	Defarges, man and wife. The Vengeance assisted in the conversation, like
ham	a regular member of the establishment.
spam	As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferent
spam	French) for a small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a careless
ham	glance at him, and then a keener, and then a keener, and then advanced
ham	to him herself, and asked him what it was he had ordered.
spam	He repeated what he had already said.
ham	"English?" asked Madame Defarge, inquisitively raising her dark
spam	eyebrows.
spam	After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French word were
spam	slow to express itself to him, he answered, in his former strong foreign
ham	accent. "Yes, madame, yes. I am English!"
ham	Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as he
spam	took up a Jacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling out its
ham	meaning, he heard her say, "I swear to you, like Evremonde!"
ham	Defarge brought him the wine, and gave him Good Evening.
ham	"How?"
spam	"Good evening."
spam	"Oh! Good evening, citizen," filling his glass. "Ah! and good wine. I
ham	drink to the Republic."
ham	Defarge went back to the counter, and said, "Certainly, a little like."
ham	Madame sternly retorted, "I tell you a good deal like." Jacques Three
ham	pacifically remarked, "He is so much in your mind, see you, madame."
ham	The amiable Vengeance added, with a laugh, "Yes, my faith! And you
ham	are looking forward with so much pleasure to seeing him once more
ham	to-morrow!"
spam	Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slow
spam	forefinger, and with a studious and absorbed face. They were all leaning
spam	their arms on the counter close together, speaking low. After a silence
spam	of a few moments, during which they all looked towards him without
spam	disturbing his outward attention from the Jacobin editor, they resumed
ham	their conversation.
spam	"It is true what madame says," observed Jacques Three. "Why stop? There
spam	is great force in that. Why stop?"
spam	"Well, well," reasoned Defarge, "but one must stop somewhere. After all,
spam	the question is still where?"
ham	"At extermination," said madame.
spam	"Magnificent!" croaked Jacques Three. The Vengeance, also, highly
spam	approved.
ham	"Extermination is good doctrine, my wife," said Defarge, rather
spam	troubled; "in general, I say nothing against it. But this Doctor has
spam	suffered much; you have seen him to-day; you have observed his face when
spam	the paper was read."
ham	"I have observed his face!" repeated madame, contemptuously and angrily.
ham	"Yes. I have observed his face. I have observed his face to be not the
spam	face of a true friend of the Republic. Let him take care of his face!"
spam	"And you have observed, my wife," said Defarge, in a deprecatory manner,
ham	"the anguish of his daughter, which must be a dreadful anguish to him!"
spam	"I have observed his daughter," repeated madame; "yes, I have observed
spam	his daughter, more times than one. I have observed her to-day, and I
spam	have observed her other days. I have observed her in the court, and
ham	I have observed her in the street by the prison. Let me but lift my
ham	finger--!" She seemed to raise it (the listener's eyes were always on
spam	his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle on the ledge before her, as
ham	if the axe had dropped.
ham	"The citizeness is superb!" croaked the Juryman.
spam	"She is an Angel!" said The Vengeance, and embraced her.
spam	"As to thee," pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband, "if it
spam	depended on thee--which, happily, it does not--thou wouldst rescue this
ham	man even now."
ham	"No!" protested Defarge. "Not if to lift this glass would do it! But I
spam	would leave the matter there. I say, stop there."
spam	"See you then, Jacques," said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; "and see you,
spam	too, my little Vengeance; see you both! Listen! For other crimes as
spam	tyrants and oppressors, I have this race a long time on my register,
spam	doomed to destruction and extermination. Ask my husband, is that so."
spam	"It is so," assented Defarge, without being asked.
spam	"In the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, he finds
ham	this paper of to-day, and he brings it home, and in the middle of the
spam	night when this place is clear and shut, we read it, here on this spot,
spam	by the light of this lamp. Ask him, is that so."
spam	"It is so," assented Defarge.
ham	"That night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lamp is
ham	burnt out, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters and between
ham	those iron bars, that I have now a secret to communicate. Ask him, is
ham	that so."
spam	"It is so," assented Defarge again.
spam	"I communicate to him that secret. I smite this bosom with these two
ham	hands as I smite it now, and I tell him, 'Defarge, I was brought up
spam	among the fishermen of the sea-shore, and that peasant family so injured
ham	by the two Evremonde brothers, as that Bastille paper describes, is my
spam	family. Defarge, that sister of the mortally wounded boy upon the ground
ham	was my sister, that husband was my sister's husband, that unborn child
spam	was their child, that brother was my brother, that father was my father,
ham	those dead are my dead, and that summons to answer for those things
spam	descends to me!' Ask him, is that so."
ham	"It is so," assented Defarge once more.
spam	"Then tell Wind and Fire where to stop," returned madame; "but don't
ham	tell me."
ham	Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly nature
ham	of her wrath--the listener could feel how white she was, without seeing
spam	her--and both highly commended it. Defarge, a weak minority, interposed
spam	a few words for the memory of the compassionate wife of the Marquis; but
ham	only elicited from his own wife a repetition of her last reply. "Tell
spam	the Wind and the Fire where to stop; not me!"
ham	Customers entered, and the group was broken up. The English customer
spam	paid for what he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked, as
ham	a stranger, to be directed towards the National Palace. Madame Defarge
spam	took him to the door, and put her arm on his, in pointing out the road.
spam	The English customer was not without his reflections then, that it might
spam	be a good deed to seize that arm, lift it, and strike under it sharp and
ham	deep.
spam	But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of the
ham	prison wall. At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to present
ham	himself in Mr. Lorry's room again, where he found the old gentleman
ham	walking to and fro in restless anxiety. He said he had been with Lucie
spam	until just now, and had only left her for a few minutes, to come and
ham	keep his appointment. Her father had not been seen, since he quitted the
ham	banking-house towards four o'clock. She had some faint hopes that his
spam	mediation might save Charles, but they were very slight. He had been
ham	more than five hours gone: where could he be?
ham	Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and
spam	he being unwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that he
spam	should go back to her, and come to the banking-house again at midnight.
ham	In the meanwhile, Carton would wait alone by the fire for the Doctor.
spam	He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manette
ham	did not come back. Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him, and
spam	brought none. Where could he be?
ham	They were discussing this question, and were almost building up some
spam	weak structure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard him on
ham	the stairs. The instant he entered the room, it was plain that all was
ham	lost.
ham	Whether he had really been to any one, or whether he had been all that
spam	time traversing the streets, was never known. As he stood staring at
ham	them, they asked him no question, for his face told them everything.
ham	"I cannot find it," said he, "and I must have it. Where is it?"
ham	His head and throat were bare, and, as he spoke with a helpless look
ham	straying all around, he took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor.
spam	"Where is my bench? I have been looking everywhere for my bench, and I
spam	can't find it. What have they done with my work? Time presses: I must
spam	finish those shoes."
spam	They looked at one another, and their hearts died within them.
spam	"Come, come!" said he, in a whimpering miserable way; "let me get to
ham	work. Give me my work."
ham	Receiving no answer, he tore his hair, and beat his feet upon the
spam	ground, like a distracted child.
ham	"Don't torture a poor forlorn wretch," he implored them, with a dreadful
ham	cry; "but give me my work! What is to become of us, if those shoes are
spam	not done to-night?"
spam	Lost, utterly lost!
spam	It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him,
spam	that--as if by agreement--they each put a hand upon his shoulder, and
ham	soothed him to sit down before the fire, with a promise that he should
ham	have his work presently. He sank into the chair, and brooded over the
ham	embers, and shed tears. As if all that had happened since the garret
ham	time were a momentary fancy, or a dream, Mr. Lorry saw him shrink into
ham	the exact figure that Defarge had had in keeping.
spam	Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by this spectacle
spam	of ruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions. His lonely
ham	daughter, bereft of her final hope and reliance, appealed to them both
ham	too strongly. Again, as if by agreement, they looked at one another with
ham	one meaning in their faces. Carton was the first to speak:
spam	"The last chance is gone: it was not much. Yes; he had better be taken
ham	to her. But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadily attend to
ham	me? Don't ask me why I make the stipulations I am going to make, and
ham	exact the promise I am going to exact; I have a reason--a good one."
ham	"I do not doubt it," answered Mr. Lorry. "Say on."
ham	The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonously
spam	rocking itself to and fro, and moaning. They spoke in such a tone as
spam	they would have used if they had been watching by a sick-bed in the
spam	night.
spam	Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his
spam	feet. As he did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed to
ham	carry the lists of his day's duties, fell lightly on the floor. Carton
spam	took it up, and there was a folded paper in it. "We should look
spam	at this!" he said. Mr. Lorry nodded his consent. He opened it, and
spam	exclaimed, "Thank _God!_"
ham	"What is it?" asked Mr. Lorry, eagerly.
spam	"A moment! Let me speak of it in its place. First," he put his hand in
ham	his coat, and took another paper from it, "that is the certificate which
ham	enables me to pass out of this city. Look at it. You see--Sydney Carton,
ham	an Englishman?"
ham	Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand, gazing in his earnest face.
spam	"Keep it for me until to-morrow. I shall see him to-morrow, you
spam	remember, and I had better not take it into the prison."
spam	"Why not?"
spam	"I don't know; I prefer not to do so. Now, take this paper that Doctor
ham	Manette has carried about him. It is a similar certificate, enabling him
spam	and his daughter and her child, at any time, to pass the barrier and the
ham	frontier! You see?"
ham	"Yes!"
ham	"Perhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution against evil,
ham	yesterday. When is it dated? But no matter; don't stay to look; put it
ham	up carefully with mine and your own. Now, observe! I never doubted until
spam	within this hour or two, that he had, or could have such a paper. It is
ham	good, until recalled. But it may be soon recalled, and, I have reason to
spam	think, will be."
ham	"They are not in danger?"
spam	"They are in great danger. They are in danger of denunciation by Madame
ham	Defarge. I know it from her own lips. I have overheard words of that
ham	woman's, to-night, which have presented their danger to me in strong
ham	colours. I have lost no time, and since then, I have seen the spy. He
ham	confirms me. He knows that a wood-sawyer, living by the prison wall,
spam	is under the control of the Defarges, and has been rehearsed by
ham	Madame Defarge as to his having seen Her"--he never mentioned Lucie's
spam	name--"making signs and signals to prisoners. It is easy to foresee that
ham	the pretence will be the common one, a prison plot, and that it will
ham	involve her life--and perhaps her child's--and perhaps her father's--for
ham	both have been seen with her at that place. Don't look so horrified. You
spam	will save them all."
ham	"Heaven grant I may, Carton! But how?"
ham	"I am going to tell you how. It will depend on you, and it could depend
ham	on no better man. This new denunciation will certainly not take place
spam	until after to-morrow; probably not until two or three days afterwards;
ham	more probably a week afterwards. You know it is a capital crime, to
ham	mourn for, or sympathise with, a victim of the Guillotine. She and her
ham	father would unquestionably be guilty of this crime, and this woman (the
spam	inveteracy of whose pursuit cannot be described) would wait to add that
spam	strength to her case, and make herself doubly sure. You follow me?"
spam	"So attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, that for
ham	the moment I lose sight," touching the back of the Doctor's chair, "even
ham	of this distress."
spam	"You have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoast
spam	as quickly as the journey can be made. Your preparations have been
spam	completed for some days, to return to England. Early to-morrow have your
spam	horses ready, so that they may be in starting trim at two o'clock in the
spam	afternoon."
ham	"It shall be done!"
ham	His manner was so fervent and inspiring, that Mr. Lorry caught the
spam	flame, and was as quick as youth.
ham	"You are a noble heart. Did I say we could depend upon no better man?
ham	Tell her, to-night, what you know of her danger as involving her child
ham	and her father. Dwell upon that, for she would lay her own fair head
ham	beside her husband's cheerfully." He faltered for an instant; then went
spam	on as before. "For the sake of her child and her father, press upon her
ham	the necessity of leaving Paris, with them and you, at that hour. Tell
ham	her that it was her husband's last arrangement. Tell her that more
spam	depends upon it than she dare believe, or hope. You think that her
spam	father, even in this sad state, will submit himself to her; do you not?"
spam	"I am sure of it."
ham	"I thought so. Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements made in
spam	the courtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in the carriage.
spam	The moment I come to you, take me in, and drive away."
ham	"I understand that I wait for you under all circumstances?"
ham	"You have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know, and will
ham	reserve my place. Wait for nothing but to have my place occupied, and
spam	then for England!"
ham	"Why, then," said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm and steady
spam	hand, "it does not all depend on one old man, but I shall have a young
ham	and ardent man at my side."
spam	"By the help of Heaven you shall! Promise me solemnly that nothing will
ham	influence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledged to one
spam	another."
spam	"Nothing, Carton."
ham	"Remember these words to-morrow: change the course, or delay in it--for
ham	any reason--and no life can possibly be saved, and many lives must
spam	inevitably be sacrificed."
ham	"I will remember them. I hope to do my part faithfully."
ham	"And I hope to do mine. Now, good bye!"
ham	Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though he even
spam	put the old man's hand to his lips, he did not part from him then. He
spam	helped him so far to arouse the rocking figure before the dying embers,
spam	as to get a cloak and hat put upon it, and to tempt it forth to find
ham	where the bench and work were hidden that it still moaningly besought
spam	to have. He walked on the other side of it and protected it to the
spam	courtyard of the house where the afflicted heart--so happy in
spam	the memorable time when he had revealed his own desolate heart to
spam	it--outwatched the awful night. He entered the courtyard and remained
spam	there for a few moments alone, looking up at the light in the window of
spam	her room. Before he went away, he breathed a blessing towards it, and a
ham	Farewell.
ham	XIII. Fifty-two
spam	In the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the day awaited
spam	their fate. They were in number as the weeks of the year. Fifty-two were
spam	to roll that afternoon on the life-tide of the city to the boundless
spam	everlasting sea. Before their cells were quit of them, new occupants
spam	were appointed; before their blood ran into the blood spilled yesterday,
spam	the blood that was to mingle with theirs to-morrow was already set
spam	apart.
ham	Two score and twelve were told off. From the farmer-general of seventy,
spam	whose riches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty, whose
ham	poverty and obscurity could not save her. Physical diseases, engendered
spam	in the vices and neglects of men, will seize on victims of all degrees;
ham	and the frightful moral disorder, born of unspeakable suffering,
ham	intolerable oppression, and heartless indifference, smote equally
ham	without distinction.
ham	Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with no
spam	flattering delusion since he came to it from the Tribunal. In every line
ham	of the narrative he had heard, he had heard his condemnation. He had
spam	fully comprehended that no personal influence could possibly save him,
spam	that he was virtually sentenced by the millions, and that units could
ham	avail him nothing.
spam	Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wife fresh
spam	before him, to compose his mind to what it must bear. His hold on life
ham	was strong, and it was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradual efforts
spam	and degrees unclosed a little here, it clenched the tighter there; and
spam	when he brought his strength to bear on that hand and it yielded,
spam	this was closed again. There was a hurry, too, in all his thoughts,
spam	a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contended against
spam	resignation. If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, then his wife and
spam	child who had to live after him, seemed to protest and to make it a
spam	selfish thing.
ham	But, all this was at first. Before long, the consideration that there
ham	was no disgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers went the same
ham	road wrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up to stimulate
spam	him. Next followed the thought that much of the future peace of mind
spam	enjoyable by the dear ones, depended on his quiet fortitude. So,
spam	by degrees he calmed into the better state, when he could raise his
ham	thoughts much higher, and draw comfort down.
spam	Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he had
ham	travelled thus far on his last way. Being allowed to purchase the means
spam	of writing, and a light, he sat down to write until such time as the
ham	prison lamps should be extinguished.
spam	He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had known nothing
ham	of her father's imprisonment, until he had heard of it from herself,
spam	and that he had been as ignorant as she of his father's and uncle's
ham	responsibility for that misery, until the paper had been read. He had
spam	already explained to her that his concealment from herself of the name
ham	he had relinquished, was the one condition--fully intelligible now--that
ham	her father had attached to their betrothal, and was the one promise he
spam	had still exacted on the morning of their marriage. He entreated her,
spam	for her father's sake, never to seek to know whether her father had
spam	become oblivious of the existence of the paper, or had had it recalled
ham	to him (for the moment, or for good), by the story of the Tower, on
ham	that old Sunday under the dear old plane-tree in the garden. If he had
spam	preserved any definite remembrance of it, there could be no doubt that
ham	he had supposed it destroyed with the Bastille, when he had found no
spam	mention of it among the relics of prisoners which the populace had
ham	discovered there, and which had been described to all the world. He
spam	besought her--though he added that he knew it was needless--to console
ham	her father, by impressing him through every tender means she could think
ham	of, with the truth that he had done nothing for which he could justly
ham	reproach himself, but had uniformly forgotten himself for their joint
ham	sakes. Next to her preservation of his own last grateful love and
spam	blessing, and her overcoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their
spam	dear child, he adjured her, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her
ham	father.
ham	To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told her
spam	father that he expressly confided his wife and child to his care. And
spam	he told him this, very strongly, with the hope of rousing him from any
spam	despondency or dangerous retrospect towards which he foresaw he might be
ham	tending.
spam	To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs.
spam	That done, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warm
spam	attachment, all was done. He never thought of Carton. His mind was so
spam	full of the others, that he never once thought of him.
spam	He had time to finish these letters before the lights were put out. When
spam	he lay down on his straw bed, he thought he had done with this world.
ham	But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shining
ham	forms. Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it had
ham	nothing in it like the real house), unaccountably released and light of
ham	heart, he was with Lucie again, and she told him it was all a dream, and
ham	he had never gone away. A pause of forgetfulness, and then he had even
ham	suffered, and had come back to her, dead and at peace, and yet there
ham	was no difference in him. Another pause of oblivion, and he awoke in the
spam	sombre morning, unconscious where he was or what had happened, until it
spam	flashed upon his mind, "this is the day of my death!"
spam	Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fifty-two heads
ham	were to fall. And now, while he was composed, and hoped that he could
spam	meet the end with quiet heroism, a new action began in his waking
ham	thoughts, which was very difficult to master.
ham	He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life. How
ham	high it was from the ground, how many steps it had, where he would be
ham	stood, how he would be touched, whether the touching hands would be dyed
ham	red, which way his face would be turned, whether he would be the first,
ham	or might be the last: these and many similar questions, in nowise
spam	directed by his will, obtruded themselves over and over again, countless
ham	times. Neither were they connected with fear: he was conscious of no
ham	fear. Rather, they originated in a strange besetting desire to know what
ham	to do when the time came; a desire gigantically disproportionate to the
spam	few swift moments to which it referred; a wondering that was more like
spam	the wondering of some other spirit within his, than his own.
ham	The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck the
ham	numbers he would never hear again. Nine gone for ever, ten gone for
ham	ever, eleven gone for ever, twelve coming on to pass away. After a hard
spam	contest with that eccentric action of thought which had last perplexed
ham	him, he had got the better of it. He walked up and down, softly
ham	repeating their names to himself. The worst of the strife was over.
spam	He could walk up and down, free from distracting fancies, praying for
spam	himself and for them.
ham	Twelve gone for ever.
spam	He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and he knew he would
spam	be summoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils jolted heavily
spam	and slowly through the streets. Therefore, he resolved to keep Two
spam	before his mind, as the hour, and so to strengthen himself in the
spam	interval that he might be able, after that time, to strengthen others.
spam	Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast, a very
spam	different man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro at La Force,
spam	he heard One struck away from him, without surprise. The hour had
ham	measured like most other hours. Devoutly thankful to Heaven for his
spam	recovered self-possession, he thought, "There is but another now," and
spam	turned to walk again.
spam	Footsteps in the stone passage outside the door. He stopped.
spam	The key was put in the lock, and turned. Before the door was opened, or
spam	as it opened, a man said in a low voice, in English: "He has never seen
ham	me here; I have kept out of his way. Go you in alone; I wait near. Lose
ham	no time!"
spam	The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before him
ham	face to face, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile on his
spam	features, and a cautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton.
spam	There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, for the
ham	first moment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition of his own
spam	imagining. But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took the prisoner's
spam	hand, and it was his real grasp.
spam	"Of all the people upon earth, you least expected to see me?" he said.
ham	"I could not believe it to be you. I can scarcely believe it now. You
spam	are not"--the apprehension came suddenly into his mind--"a prisoner?"
ham	"No. I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepers
ham	here, and in virtue of it I stand before you. I come from her--your
ham	wife, dear Darnay."
spam	The prisoner wrung his hand.
ham	"I bring you a request from her."
ham	"What is it?"
spam	"A most earnest, pressing, and emphatic entreaty, addressed to you
ham	in the most pathetic tones of the voice so dear to you, that you well
ham	remember."
spam	The prisoner turned his face partly aside.
spam	"You have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I have
ham	no time to tell you. You must comply with it--take off those boots you
ham	wear, and draw on these of mine."
spam	There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind the prisoner.
ham	Carton, pressing forward, had already, with the speed of lightning, got
ham	him down into it, and stood over him, barefoot.
spam	"Draw on these boots of mine. Put your hands to them; put your will to
ham	them. Quick!"
spam	"Carton, there is no escaping from this place; it never can be done. You
spam	will only die with me. It is madness."
spam	"It would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I? When I ask you
ham	to pass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here. Change
spam	that cravat for this of mine, that coat for this of mine. While you do
ham	it, let me take this ribbon from your hair, and shake out your hair like
spam	this of mine!"
ham	With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action,
spam	that appeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him.
spam	The prisoner was like a young child in his hands.
spam	"Carton! Dear Carton! It is madness. It cannot be accomplished, it never
spam	can be done, it has been attempted, and has always failed. I implore you
ham	not to add your death to the bitterness of mine."
spam	"Do I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door? When I ask that,
ham	refuse. There are pen and ink and paper on this table. Is your hand
spam	steady enough to write?"
spam	"It was when you came in."
ham	"Steady it again, and write what I shall dictate. Quick, friend, quick!"
ham	Pressing his hand to his bewildered head, Darnay sat down at the table.
ham	Carton, with his right hand in his breast, stood close beside him.
ham	"Write exactly as I speak."
spam	"To whom do I address it?"
ham	"To no one." Carton still had his hand in his breast.
ham	"Do I date it?"
spam	"No."
ham	The prisoner looked up, at each question. Carton, standing over him with
spam	his hand in his breast, looked down.
spam	"'If you remember,'" said Carton, dictating, "'the words that passed
spam	between us, long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it.
spam	You do remember them, I know. It is not in your nature to forget them.'"
ham	He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing to look
spam	up in his hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closing upon
spam	something.
ham	"Have you written 'forget them'?" Carton asked.
ham	"I have. Is that a weapon in your hand?"
ham	"No; I am not armed."
ham	"What is it in your hand?"
ham	"You shall know directly. Write on; there are but a few words more." He
spam	dictated again. "'I am thankful that the time has come, when I can prove
ham	them. That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.'" As he said these
spam	words with his eyes fixed on the writer, his hand slowly and softly
spam	moved down close to the writer's face.
spam	The pen dropped from Darnay's fingers on the table, and he looked about
spam	him vacantly.
ham	"What vapour is that?" he asked.
ham	"Vapour?"
ham	"Something that crossed me?"
ham	"I am conscious of nothing; there can be nothing here. Take up the pen
spam	and finish. Hurry, hurry!"
spam	As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, the
ham	prisoner made an effort to rally his attention. As he looked at Carton
ham	with clouded eyes and with an altered manner of breathing, Carton--his
ham	hand again in his breast--looked steadily at him.
ham	"Hurry, hurry!"
ham	The prisoner bent over the paper, once more.
spam	"'If it had been otherwise;'" Carton's hand was again watchfully and
spam	softly stealing down; "'I never should have used the longer opportunity.
spam	If it had been otherwise;'" the hand was at the prisoner's face; "'I
ham	should but have had so much the more to answer for. If it had been
spam	otherwise--'" Carton looked at the pen and saw it was trailing off into
spam	unintelligible signs.
ham	Carton's hand moved back to his breast no more. The prisoner sprang up
spam	with a reproachful look, but Carton's hand was close and firm at his
ham	nostrils, and Carton's left arm caught him round the waist. For a few
spam	seconds he faintly struggled with the man who had come to lay down his
spam	life for him; but, within a minute or so, he was stretched insensible on
ham	the ground.
ham	Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was, Carton
ham	dressed himself in the clothes the prisoner had laid aside, combed back
spam	his hair, and tied it with the ribbon the prisoner had worn. Then, he
spam	softly called, "Enter there! Come in!" and the Spy presented himself.
ham	"You see?" said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee beside the
spam	insensible figure, putting the paper in the breast: "is your hazard very
spam	great?"
spam	"Mr. Carton," the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers, "my
ham	hazard is not _that_, in the thick of business here, if you are true to
ham	the whole of your bargain."
ham	"Don't fear me. I will be true to the death."
spam	"You must be, Mr. Carton, if the tale of fifty-two is to be right. Being
spam	made right by you in that dress, I shall have no fear."
ham	"Have no fear! I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and the
spam	rest will soon be far from here, please God! Now, get assistance and
ham	take me to the coach."
ham	"You?" said the Spy nervously.
spam	"Him, man, with whom I have exchanged. You go out at the gate by which
ham	you brought me in?"
ham	"Of course."
spam	"I was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter now you
ham	take me out. The parting interview has overpowered me. Such a thing has
spam	happened here, often, and too often. Your life is in your own hands.
ham	Quick! Call assistance!"
ham	"You swear not to betray me?" said the trembling Spy, as he paused for a
spam	last moment.
ham	"Man, man!" returned Carton, stamping his foot; "have I sworn by no
spam	solemn vow already, to go through with this, that you waste the precious
spam	moments now? Take him yourself to the courtyard you know of, place
spam	him yourself in the carriage, show him yourself to Mr. Lorry, tell him
spam	yourself to give him no restorative but air, and to remember my words of
spam	last night, and his promise of last night, and drive away!"
spam	The Spy withdrew, and Carton seated himself at the table, resting his
spam	forehead on his hands. The Spy returned immediately, with two men.
ham	"How, then?" said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure. "So
spam	afflicted to find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery of
spam	Sainte Guillotine?"
ham	"A good patriot," said the other, "could hardly have been more afflicted
ham	if the Aristocrat had drawn a blank."
ham	They raised the unconscious figure, placed it on a litter they had
spam	brought to the door, and bent to carry it away.
spam	"The time is short, Evremonde," said the Spy, in a warning voice.
ham	"I know it well," answered Carton. "Be careful of my friend, I entreat
ham	you, and leave me."
ham	"Come, then, my children," said Barsad. "Lift him, and come away!"
ham	The door closed, and Carton was left alone. Straining his powers of
spam	listening to the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denote
spam	suspicion or alarm. There was none. Keys turned, doors clashed,
spam	footsteps passed along distant passages: no cry was raised, or hurry
ham	made, that seemed unusual. Breathing more freely in a little while, he
spam	sat down at the table, and listened again until the clock struck Two.
spam	Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, then
ham	began to be audible. Several doors were opened in succession, and
ham	finally his own. A gaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in, merely
spam	saying, "Follow me, Evremonde!" and he followed into a large dark room,
spam	at a distance. It was a dark winter day, and what with the shadows
ham	within, and what with the shadows without, he could but dimly discern
spam	the others who were brought there to have their arms bound. Some were
ham	standing; some seated. Some were lamenting, and in restless motion;
spam	but, these were few. The great majority were silent and still, looking
ham	fixedly at the ground.
ham	As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-two
spam	were brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace him,
ham	as having a knowledge of him. It thrilled him with a great dread of
spam	discovery; but the man went on. A very few moments after that, a young
ham	woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare face in which there was
ham	no vestige of colour, and large widely opened patient eyes, rose from
ham	the seat where he had observed her sitting, and came to speak to him.
ham	"Citizen Evremonde," she said, touching him with her cold hand. "I am a
ham	poor little seamstress, who was with you in La Force."
spam	He murmured for answer: "True. I forget what you were accused of?"
spam	"Plots. Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any. Is it
ham	likely? Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak creature
spam	like me?"
spam	The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tears
ham	started from his eyes.
spam	"I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing. I
spam	am not unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much good
spam	to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know how that can be,
ham	Citizen Evremonde. Such a poor weak little creature!"
spam	As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to, it
ham	warmed and softened to this pitiable girl.
spam	"I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was true?"
ham	"It was. But, I was again taken and condemned."
ham	"If I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold your
ham	hand? I am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give me
spam	more courage."
spam	As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt in
ham	them, and then astonishment. He pressed the work-worn, hunger-worn young
spam	fingers, and touched his lips.
spam	"Are you dying for him?" she whispered.
ham	"And his wife and child. Hush! Yes."
ham	"O you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?"
ham	"Hush! Yes, my poor sister; to the last."
ham	        *****
spam	The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in that
ham	same hour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about
ham	it, when a coach going out of Paris drives up to be examined.
ham	"Who goes here? Whom have we within? Papers!"
ham	The papers are handed out, and read.
ham	"Alexandre Manette. Physician. French. Which is he?"
spam	This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering old man
ham	pointed out.
ham	"Apparently the Citizen-Doctor is not in his right mind? The
ham	Revolution-fever will have been too much for him?"
spam	Greatly too much for him.
ham	"Hah! Many suffer with it. Lucie. His daughter. French. Which is she?"
spam	This is she.
spam	"Apparently it must be. Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?"
ham	It is.
ham	"Hah! Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere. Lucie, her child. English.
spam	This is she?"
spam	She and no other.
ham	"Kiss me, child of Evremonde. Now, thou hast kissed a good Republican;
spam	something new in thy family; remember it! Sydney Carton. Advocate.
ham	English. Which is he?"
ham	He lies here, in this corner of the carriage. He, too, is pointed out.
ham	"Apparently the English advocate is in a swoon?"
ham	It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented that
ham	he is not in strong health, and has separated sadly from a friend who is
spam	under the displeasure of the Republic.
ham	"Is that all? It is not a great deal, that! Many are under the
spam	displeasure of the Republic, and must look out at the little window.
ham	Jarvis Lorry. Banker. English. Which is he?"
ham	"I am he. Necessarily, being the last."
spam	It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions. It
spam	is Jarvis Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the coach
ham	door, replying to a group of officials. They leisurely walk round the
ham	carriage and leisurely mount the box, to look at what little luggage it
spam	carries on the roof; the country-people hanging about, press nearer to
ham	the coach doors and greedily stare in; a little child, carried by its
ham	mother, has its short arm held out for it, that it may touch the wife of
spam	an aristocrat who has gone to the Guillotine.
ham	"Behold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned."
ham	"One can depart, citizen?"
ham	"One can depart. Forward, my postilions! A good journey!"
spam	"I salute you, citizens.--And the first danger passed!"
spam	These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands, and
ham	looks upward. There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping, there
spam	is the heavy breathing of the insensible traveller.
spam	"Are we not going too slowly? Can they not be induced to go faster?"
spam	asks Lucie, clinging to the old man.
spam	"It would seem like flight, my darling. I must not urge them too much;
ham	it would rouse suspicion."
ham	"Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued!"
ham	"The road is clear, my dearest. So far, we are not pursued."
ham	Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous buildings,
spam	dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues of leafless
ham	trees. The hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep mud is on
spam	either side. Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud, to avoid the
ham	stones that clatter us and shake us; sometimes, we stick in ruts and
ham	sloughs there. The agony of our impatience is then so great, that in our
ham	wild alarm and hurry we are for getting out and running--hiding--doing
spam	anything but stopping.
spam	Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitary
ham	farms, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos and threes,
spam	avenues of leafless trees. Have these men deceived us, and taken us back
ham	by another road? Is not this the same place twice over? Thank Heaven,
ham	no. A village. Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued! Hush!
ham	the posting-house.
ham	Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach stands in
ham	the little street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood upon it
ham	of ever moving again; leisurely, the new horses come into visible
ham	existence, one by one; leisurely, the new postilions follow, sucking and
ham	plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely, the old postilions count
ham	their money, make wrong additions, and arrive at dissatisfied results.
spam	All the time, our overfraught hearts are beating at a rate that would
ham	far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastest horses ever foaled.
ham	At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are left
spam	behind. We are through the village, up the hill, and down the hill, and
ham	on the low watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions exchange speech with
ham	animated gesticulation, and the horses are pulled up, almost on their
spam	haunches. We are pursued?
ham	"Ho! Within the carriage there. Speak then!"
spam	"What is it?" asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window.
spam	"How many did they say?"
spam	"I do not understand you."
ham	"--At the last post. How many to the Guillotine to-day?"
ham	"Fifty-two."
ham	"I said so! A brave number! My fellow-citizen here would have it
ham	forty-two; ten more heads are worth having. The Guillotine goes
spam	handsomely. I love it. Hi forward. Whoop!"
ham	The night comes on dark. He moves more; he is beginning to revive, and
spam	to speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he asks him,
spam	by his name, what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind Heaven, and help
spam	us! Look out, look out, and see if we are pursued.
ham	The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and
ham	the moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit of
ham	us; but, so far, we are pursued by nothing else.
ham	XIV. The Knitting Done
spam	In that same juncture of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their fate
ham	Madame Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and
ham	Jacques Three of the Revolutionary Jury. Not in the wine-shop did Madame
spam	Defarge confer with these ministers, but in the shed of the wood-sawyer,
ham	erst a mender of roads. The sawyer himself did not participate in the
ham	conference, but abided at a little distance, like an outer satellite who
spam	was not to speak until required, or to offer an opinion until invited.
ham	"But our Defarge," said Jacques Three, "is undoubtedly a good
ham	Republican? Eh?"
spam	"There is no better," the voluble Vengeance protested in her shrill
ham	notes, "in France."
spam	"Peace, little Vengeance," said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with
spam	a slight frown on her lieutenant's lips, "hear me speak. My husband,
spam	fellow-citizen, is a good Republican and a bold man; he has deserved
spam	well of the Republic, and possesses its confidence. But my husband has
spam	his weaknesses, and he is so weak as to relent towards this Doctor."
spam	"It is a great pity," croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his head,
ham	with his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; "it is not quite like a good
spam	citizen; it is a thing to regret."
ham	"See you," said madame, "I care nothing for this Doctor, I. He may wear
spam	his head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all one to
ham	me. But, the Evremonde people are to be exterminated, and the wife and
ham	child must follow the husband and father."
spam	"She has a fine head for it," croaked Jacques Three. "I have seen blue
ham	eyes and golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samson held
ham	them up." Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure.
ham	Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little.
ham	"The child also," observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoyment
ham	of his words, "has golden hair and blue eyes. And we seldom have a child
ham	there. It is a pretty sight!"
ham	"In a word," said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction,
ham	"I cannot trust my husband in this matter. Not only do I feel, since
spam	last night, that I dare not confide to him the details of my projects;
ham	but also I feel that if I delay, there is danger of his giving warning,
spam	and then they might escape."
ham	"That must never be," croaked Jacques Three; "no one must escape. We
ham	have not half enough as it is. We ought to have six score a day."
spam	"In a word," Madame Defarge went on, "my husband has not my reason for
spam	pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason for
spam	regarding this Doctor with any sensibility. I must act for myself,
ham	therefore. Come hither, little citizen."
ham	The wood-sawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in the
spam	submission, of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap.
spam	"Touching those signals, little citizen," said Madame Defarge, sternly,
ham	"that she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear witness to them
ham	this very day?"
ham	"Ay, ay, why not!" cried the sawyer. "Every day, in all weathers, from
spam	two to four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one, sometimes
spam	without. I know what I know. I have seen with my eyes."
spam	He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidental
spam	imitation of some few of the great diversity of signals that he had
ham	never seen.
ham	"Clearly plots," said Jacques Three. "Transparently!"
spam	"There is no doubt of the Jury?" inquired Madame Defarge, letting her
ham	eyes turn to him with a gloomy smile.
spam	"Rely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness. I answer for my
spam	fellow-Jurymen."
ham	"Now, let me see," said Madame Defarge, pondering again. "Yet once more!
ham	Can I spare this Doctor to my husband? I have no feeling either way. Can
spam	I spare him?"
spam	"He would count as one head," observed Jacques Three, in a low voice.
ham	"We really have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think."
spam	"He was signalling with her when I saw her," argued Madame Defarge; "I
spam	cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be silent, and
ham	trust the case wholly to him, this little citizen here. For, I am not a
spam	bad witness."
spam	The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their fervent
ham	protestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous of
spam	witnesses. The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to be a
spam	celestial witness.
spam	"He must take his chance," said Madame Defarge. "No, I cannot spare
ham	him! You are engaged at three o'clock; you are going to see the batch of
spam	to-day executed.--You?"
spam	The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly replied in
spam	the affirmative: seizing the occasion to add that he was the most ardent
ham	of Republicans, and that he would be in effect the most desolate of
spam	Republicans, if anything prevented him from enjoying the pleasure of
spam	smoking his afternoon pipe in the contemplation of the droll national
ham	barber. He was so very demonstrative herein, that he might have been
spam	suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes that looked contemptuously at
ham	him out of Madame Defarge's head) of having his small individual fears
spam	for his own personal safety, every hour in the day.
spam	"I," said madame, "am equally engaged at the same place. After it is
ham	over--say at eight to-night--come you to me, in Saint Antoine, and we
spam	will give information against these people at my Section."
ham	The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the
ham	citizeness. The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed, evaded
spam	her glance as a small dog would have done, retreated among his wood, and
spam	hid his confusion over the handle of his saw.
ham	Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little nearer to
ham	the door, and there expounded her further views to them thus:
ham	"She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death. She will
spam	be mourning and grieving. She will be in a state of mind to impeach the
spam	justice of the Republic. She will be full of sympathy with its enemies.
ham	I will go to her."
ham	"What an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!" exclaimed Jacques
ham	Three, rapturously. "Ah, my cherished!" cried The Vengeance; and
spam	embraced her.
ham	"Take you my knitting," said Madame Defarge, placing it in her
spam	lieutenant's hands, "and have it ready for me in my usual seat. Keep
spam	me my usual chair. Go you there, straight, for there will probably be a
ham	greater concourse than usual, to-day."
ham	"I willingly obey the orders of my Chief," said The Vengeance with
spam	alacrity, and kissing her cheek. "You will not be late?"
ham	"I shall be there before the commencement."
ham	"And before the tumbrils arrive. Be sure you are there, my soul," said
ham	The Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned into the
ham	street, "before the tumbrils arrive!"
ham	Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and
spam	might be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the
spam	mud, and round the corner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and the
ham	Juryman, looking after her as she walked away, were highly appreciative
spam	of her fine figure, and her superb moral endowments.
spam	There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a dreadfully
spam	disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to be dreaded
spam	than this ruthless woman, now taking her way along the streets. Of a
ham	strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense and readiness, of great
ham	determination, of that kind of beauty which not only seems to impart
ham	to its possessor firmness and animosity, but to strike into others an
ham	instinctive recognition of those qualities; the troubled time would have
ham	heaved her up, under any circumstances. But, imbued from her childhood
spam	with a brooding sense of wrong, and an inveterate hatred of a class,
spam	opportunity had developed her into a tigress. She was absolutely without
ham	pity. If she had ever had the virtue in her, it had quite gone out of
spam	her.
ham	It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sins of
ham	his forefathers; she saw, not him, but them. It was nothing to her, that
ham	his wife was to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; that was
ham	insufficient punishment, because they were her natural enemies and
spam	her prey, and as such had no right to live. To appeal to her, was made
spam	hopeless by her having no sense of pity, even for herself. If she had
ham	been laid low in the streets, in any of the many encounters in which
ham	she had been engaged, she would not have pitied herself; nor, if she had
spam	been ordered to the axe to-morrow, would she have gone to it with any
spam	softer feeling than a fierce desire to change places with the man who
spam	sent her there.
spam	Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe. Carelessly
spam	worn, it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her
spam	dark hair looked rich under her coarse red cap. Lying hidden in her
spam	bosom, was a loaded pistol. Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened
ham	dagger. Thus accoutred, and walking with the confident tread of such
ham	a character, and with the supple freedom of a woman who had habitually
ham	walked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, on the brown
ham	sea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.
spam	Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment
ham	waiting for the completion of its load, had been planned out last night,
ham	the difficulty of taking Miss Pross in it had much engaged Mr. Lorry's
ham	attention. It was not merely desirable to avoid overloading the coach,
ham	but it was of the highest importance that the time occupied in examining
spam	it and its passengers, should be reduced to the utmost; since their
ham	escape might depend on the saving of only a few seconds here and there.
ham	Finally, he had proposed, after anxious consideration, that Miss Pross
spam	and Jerry, who were at liberty to leave the city, should leave it at
ham	three o'clock in the lightest-wheeled conveyance known to that period.
spam	Unencumbered with luggage, they would soon overtake the coach, and,
spam	passing it and preceding it on the road, would order its horses in
spam	advance, and greatly facilitate its progress during the precious hours
ham	of the night, when delay was the most to be dreaded.
spam	Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in that
spam	pressing emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy. She and Jerry had
spam	beheld the coach start, had known who it was that Solomon brought, had
spam	passed some ten minutes in tortures of suspense, and were now concluding
ham	their arrangements to follow the coach, even as Madame Defarge,
ham	taking her way through the streets, now drew nearer and nearer to the
ham	else-deserted lodging in which they held their consultation.
spam	"Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose agitation
ham	was so great that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move, or live:
ham	"what do you think of our not starting from this courtyard? Another
spam	carriage having already gone from here to-day, it might awaken
spam	suspicion."
ham	"My opinion, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "is as you're right. Likewise
spam	wot I'll stand by you, right or wrong."
spam	"I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures," said
ham	Miss Pross, wildly crying, "that I am incapable of forming any plan. Are
spam	_you_ capable of forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?"
spam	"Respectin' a future spear o' life, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "I
ham	hope so. Respectin' any present use o' this here blessed old head o'
ham	mine, I think not. Would you do me the favour, miss, to take notice o'
spam	two promises and wows wot it is my wishes fur to record in this here
spam	crisis?"
spam	"Oh, for gracious sake!" cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying, "record
ham	them at once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent man."
ham	"First," said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spoke with
spam	an ashy and solemn visage, "them poor things well out o' this, never no
ham	more will I do it, never no more!"
spam	"I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher," returned Miss Pross, "that you
spam	never will do it again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think it
spam	necessary to mention more particularly what it is."
spam	"No, miss," returned Jerry, "it shall not be named to you. Second: them
spam	poor things well out o' this, and never no more will I interfere with
ham	Mrs. Cruncher's flopping, never no more!"
ham	"Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be," said Miss Pross,
ham	striving to dry her eyes and compose herself, "I have no doubt it
ham	is best that Mrs. Cruncher should have it entirely under her own
ham	superintendence.--O my poor darlings!"
spam	"I go so far as to say, miss, moreover," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with a
spam	most alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit--"and let my words
spam	be took down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourself--that wot my
spam	opinions respectin' flopping has undergone a change, and that wot I only
ham	hope with all my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a flopping at the present
ham	time."
spam	"There, there, there! I hope she is, my dear man," cried the distracted
spam	Miss Pross, "and I hope she finds it answering her expectations."
ham	"Forbid it," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity,
spam	additional slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold
spam	out, "as anything wot I have ever said or done should be wisited on my
spam	earnest wishes for them poor creeturs now! Forbid it as we shouldn't all
ham	flop (if it was anyways conwenient) to get 'em out o' this here dismal
ham	risk! Forbid it, miss! Wot I say, for-_bid_ it!" This was Mr. Cruncher's
ham	conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour to find a better one.
ham	And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came
ham	nearer and nearer.
ham	"If we ever get back to our native land," said Miss Pross, "you may rely
spam	upon my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to remember and
spam	understand of what you have so impressively said; and at all events
ham	you may be sure that I shall bear witness to your being thoroughly in
ham	earnest at this dreadful time. Now, pray let us think! My esteemed Mr.
spam	Cruncher, let us think!"
ham	Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came nearer
spam	and nearer.
ham	"If you were to go before," said Miss Pross, "and stop the vehicle and
spam	horses from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me; wouldn't
ham	that be best?"
ham	Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best.
spam	"Where could you wait for me?" asked Miss Pross.
ham	Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality but
spam	Temple Bar. Alas! Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame
ham	Defarge was drawing very near indeed.
ham	"By the cathedral door," said Miss Pross. "Would it be much out of
ham	the way, to take me in, near the great cathedral door between the two
ham	towers?"
ham	"No, miss," answered Mr. Cruncher.
spam	"Then, like the best of men," said Miss Pross, "go to the posting-house
ham	straight, and make that change."
spam	"I am doubtful," said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head,
ham	"about leaving of you, you see. We don't know what may happen."
spam	"Heaven knows we don't," returned Miss Pross, "but have no fear for me.
spam	Take me in at the cathedral, at Three o'Clock, or as near it as you can,
ham	and I am sure it will be better than our going from here. I feel certain
spam	of it. There! Bless you, Mr. Cruncher! Think-not of me, but of the lives
ham	that may depend on both of us!"
spam	This exordium, and Miss Pross's two hands in quite agonised entreaty
spam	clasping his, decided Mr. Cruncher. With an encouraging nod or two, he
ham	immediately went out to alter the arrangements, and left her by herself
ham	to follow as she had proposed.
spam	The having originated a precaution which was already in course of
ham	execution, was a great relief to Miss Pross. The necessity of composing
spam	her appearance so that it should attract no special notice in the
spam	streets, was another relief. She looked at her watch, and it was twenty
spam	minutes past two. She had no time to lose, but must get ready at once.
ham	Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the deserted
spam	rooms, and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind every open door
spam	in them, Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and began laving her eyes,
spam	which were swollen and red. Haunted by her feverish apprehensions, she
spam	could not bear to have her sight obscured for a minute at a time by the
ham	dripping water, but constantly paused and looked round to see that there
ham	was no one watching her. In one of those pauses she recoiled and cried
ham	out, for she saw a figure standing in the room.
ham	The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feet of
ham	Madame Defarge. By strange stern ways, and through much staining blood,
ham	those feet had come to meet that water.
spam	Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, "The wife of Evremonde;
spam	where is she?"
ham	It flashed upon Miss Pross's mind that the doors were all standing open,
spam	and would suggest the flight. Her first act was to shut them. There were
ham	four in the room, and she shut them all. She then placed herself before
ham	the door of the chamber which Lucie had occupied.
spam	Madame Defarge's dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement,
spam	and rested on her when it was finished. Miss Pross had nothing beautiful
ham	about her; years had not tamed the wildness, or softened the grimness,
ham	of her appearance; but, she too was a determined woman in her different
ham	way, and she measured Madame Defarge with her eyes, every inch.
ham	"You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer," said Miss
spam	Pross, in her breathing. "Nevertheless, you shall not get the better of
ham	me. I am an Englishwoman."
ham	Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of
spam	Miss Pross's own perception that they two were at bay. She saw a tight,
ham	hard, wiry woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the same figure a
spam	woman with a strong hand, in the years gone by. She knew full well that
spam	Miss Pross was the family's devoted friend; Miss Pross knew full well
spam	that Madame Defarge was the family's malevolent enemy.
ham	"On my way yonder," said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of
spam	her hand towards the fatal spot, "where they reserve my chair and my
spam	knitting for me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing. I
ham	wish to see her."
spam	"I know that your intentions are evil," said Miss Pross, "and you may
ham	depend upon it, I'll hold my own against them."
spam	Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other's words;
spam	both were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner, what
ham	the unintelligible words meant.
ham	"It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this
spam	moment," said Madame Defarge. "Good patriots will know what that means.
ham	Let me see her. Go tell her that I wish to see her. Do you hear?"
ham	"If those eyes of yours were bed-winches," returned Miss Pross, "and I
spam	was an English four-poster, they shouldn't loose a splinter of me. No,
ham	you wicked foreign woman; I am your match."
spam	Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks in
spam	detail; but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she was set
spam	at naught.
spam	"Woman imbecile and pig-like!" said Madame Defarge, frowning. "I take no
ham	answer from you. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I demand
spam	to see her, or stand out of the way of the door and let me go to her!"
ham	This, with an angry explanatory wave of her right arm.
spam	"I little thought," said Miss Pross, "that I should ever want to
spam	understand your nonsensical language; but I would give all I have,
ham	except the clothes I wear, to know whether you suspect the truth, or any
spam	part of it."
ham	Neither of them for a single moment released the other's eyes. Madame
ham	Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss Pross
ham	first became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step.
ham	"I am a Briton," said Miss Pross, "I am desperate. I don't care an
spam	English Twopence for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here, the
ham	greater hope there is for my Ladybird. I'll not leave a handful of that
spam	dark hair upon your head, if you lay a finger on me!"
spam	Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes
ham	between every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath.
ham	Thus Miss Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life.
ham	But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought the
spam	irrepressible tears into her eyes. This was a courage that Madame
ham	Defarge so little comprehended as to mistake for weakness. "Ha, ha!" she
spam	laughed, "you poor wretch! What are you worth! I address myself to that
ham	Doctor." Then she raised her voice and called out, "Citizen Doctor! Wife
ham	of Evremonde! Child of Evremonde! Any person but this miserable fool,
spam	answer the Citizeness Defarge!"
spam	Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in the
spam	expression of Miss Pross's face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from
spam	either suggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone.
spam	Three of the doors she opened swiftly, and looked in.
spam	"Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing, there
ham	are odds and ends upon the ground. There is no one in that room behind
ham	you! Let me look."
spam	"Never!" said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as
spam	Madame Defarge understood the answer.
ham	"If they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued and
spam	brought back," said Madame Defarge to herself.
ham	"As long as you don't know whether they are in that room or not, you are
spam	uncertain what to do," said Miss Pross to herself; "and you shall not
spam	know that, if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, or not know
ham	that, you shall not leave here while I can hold you."
spam	"I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me,
ham	I will tear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door," said
spam	Madame Defarge.
ham	"We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard, we are
ham	not likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep you here,
spam	while every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand guineas to
spam	my darling," said Miss Pross.
ham	Madame Defarge made at the door. Miss Pross, on the instinct of the
ham	moment, seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held her tight.
ham	It was in vain for Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike; Miss Pross,
spam	with the vigorous tenacity of love, always so much stronger than hate,
ham	clasped her tight, and even lifted her from the floor in the struggle
spam	that they had. The two hands of Madame Defarge buffeted and tore her
ham	face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down, held her round the waist, and
ham	clung to her with more than the hold of a drowning woman.
ham	Soon, Madame Defarge's hands ceased to strike, and felt at her encircled
ham	waist. "It is under my arm," said Miss Pross, in smothered tones, "you
ham	shall not draw it. I am stronger than you, I bless Heaven for it. I hold
spam	you till one or other of us faints or dies!"
spam	Madame Defarge's hands were at her bosom. Miss Pross looked up, saw
spam	what it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stood
spam	alone--blinded with smoke.
ham	All this was in a second. As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful
ham	stillness, it passed out on the air, like the soul of the furious woman
ham	whose body lay lifeless on the ground.
ham	In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed the
spam	body as far from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to call for
spam	fruitless help. Happily, she bethought herself of the consequences of
ham	what she did, in time to check herself and go back. It was dreadful to
spam	go in at the door again; but, she did go in, and even went near it, to
spam	get the bonnet and other things that she must wear. These she put on,
spam	out on the staircase, first shutting and locking the door and taking
spam	away the key. She then sat down on the stairs a few moments to breathe
ham	and to cry, and then got up and hurried away.
spam	By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly have
spam	gone along the streets without being stopped. By good fortune, too, she
spam	was naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to show disfigurement
ham	like any other woman. She needed both advantages, for the marks of
ham	gripping fingers were deep in her face, and her hair was torn, and her
ham	dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) was clutched and dragged a
ham	hundred ways.
ham	In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river. Arriving
spam	at the cathedral some few minutes before her escort, and waiting there,
spam	she thought, what if the key were already taken in a net, what if
ham	it were identified, what if the door were opened and the remains
ham	discovered, what if she were stopped at the gate, sent to prison, and
spam	charged with murder! In the midst of these fluttering thoughts, the
ham	escort appeared, took her in, and took her away.
ham	"Is there any noise in the streets?" she asked him.
ham	"The usual noises," Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by the
spam	question and by her aspect.
ham	"I don't hear you," said Miss Pross. "What do you say?"
spam	It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross could
spam	not hear him. "So I'll nod my head," thought Mr. Cruncher, amazed, "at
ham	all events she'll see that." And she did.
spam	"Is there any noise in the streets now?" asked Miss Pross again,
spam	presently.
ham	Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head.
ham	"I don't hear it."
ham	"Gone deaf in an hour?" said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mind
ham	much disturbed; "wot's come to her?"
spam	"I feel," said Miss Pross, "as if there had been a flash and a crash,
ham	and that crash was the last thing I should ever hear in this life."
spam	"Blest if she ain't in a queer condition!" said Mr. Cruncher, more and
ham	more disturbed. "Wot can she have been a takin', to keep her courage up?
spam	Hark! There's the roll of them dreadful carts! You can hear that, miss?"
ham	"I can hear," said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her, "nothing. O,
ham	my good man, there was first a great crash, and then a great stillness,
spam	and that stillness seems to be fixed and unchangeable, never to be
spam	broken any more as long as my life lasts."
spam	"If she don't hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh their
ham	journey's end," said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder, "it's my
ham	opinion that indeed she never will hear anything else in this world."
ham	And indeed she never did.
ham	XV. The Footsteps Die Out For Ever
spam	Along the Paris streets, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh. Six
spam	tumbrils carry the day's wine to La Guillotine. All the devouring and
spam	insatiate Monsters imagined since imagination could record itself,
ham	are fused in the one realisation, Guillotine. And yet there is not in
spam	France, with its rich variety of soil and climate, a blade, a leaf,
spam	a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow to maturity under
spam	conditions more certain than those that have produced this horror. Crush
ham	humanity out of shape once more, under similar hammers, and it will
ham	twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow the same seed of
spam	rapacious license and oppression over again, and it will surely yield
ham	the same fruit according to its kind.
ham	Six tumbrils roll along the streets. Change these back again to what
spam	they were, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to be
ham	the carriages of absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles, the
ham	toilettes of flaring Jezebels, the churches that are not my father's
ham	house but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starving peasants!
ham	No; the great magician who majestically works out the appointed order
ham	of the Creator, never reverses his transformations. "If thou be changed
spam	into this shape by the will of God," say the seers to the enchanted, in
spam	the wise Arabian stories, "then remain so! But, if thou wear this
spam	form through mere passing conjuration, then resume thy former aspect!"
ham	Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.
spam	As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to plough up
spam	a long crooked furrow among the populace in the streets. Ridges of faces
ham	are thrown to this side and to that, and the ploughs go steadily onward.
spam	So used are the regular inhabitants of the houses to the spectacle, that
ham	in many windows there are no people, and in some the occupation of the
spam	hands is not so much as suspended, while the eyes survey the faces in
spam	the tumbrils. Here and there, the inmate has visitors to see the sight;
ham	then he points his finger, with something of the complacency of a
spam	curator or authorised exponent, to this cart and to this, and seems to
spam	tell who sat here yesterday, and who there the day before.
ham	Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all
ham	things on their last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with
ham	a lingering interest in the ways of life and men. Some, seated with
ham	drooping heads, are sunk in silent despair; again, there are some so
spam	heedful of their looks that they cast upon the multitude such glances as
spam	they have seen in theatres, and in pictures. Several close their eyes,
spam	and think, or try to get their straying thoughts together. Only one, and
ham	he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is so shattered and made
ham	drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries to dance. Not one of the whole
ham	number appeals by look or gesture, to the pity of the people.
ham	There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils,
ham	and faces are often turned up to some of them, and they are asked some
spam	question. It would seem to be always the same question, for, it is
ham	always followed by a press of people towards the third cart. The
spam	horsemen abreast of that cart, frequently point out one man in it with
ham	their swords. The leading curiosity is, to know which is he; he stands
spam	at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down, to converse with a
spam	mere girl who sits on the side of the cart, and holds his hand. He has
ham	no curiosity or care for the scene about him, and always speaks to the
spam	girl. Here and there in the long street of St. Honore, cries are raised
spam	against him. If they move him at all, it is only to a quiet smile, as he
spam	shakes his hair a little more loosely about his face. He cannot easily
spam	touch his face, his arms being bound.
spam	On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils, stands
ham	the Spy and prison-sheep. He looks into the first of them: not there.
ham	He looks into the second: not there. He already asks himself, "Has he
ham	sacrificed me?" when his face clears, as he looks into the third.
ham	"Which is Evremonde?" says a man behind him.
ham	"That. At the back there."
spam	"With his hand in the girl's?"
ham	"Yes."
ham	The man cries, "Down, Evremonde! To the Guillotine all aristocrats!
ham	Down, Evremonde!"
ham	"Hush, hush!" the Spy entreats him, timidly.
spam	"And why not, citizen?"
ham	"He is going to pay the forfeit: it will be paid in five minutes more.
spam	Let him be at peace."
ham	But the man continuing to exclaim, "Down, Evremonde!" the face of
spam	Evremonde is for a moment turned towards him. Evremonde then sees the
spam	Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.
ham	The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among the
spam	populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution, and
ham	end. The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in and
spam	close behind the last plough as it passes on, for all are following
ham	to the Guillotine. In front of it, seated in chairs, as in a garden of
ham	public diversion, are a number of women, busily knitting. On one of the
spam	fore-most chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking about for her friend.
ham	"Therese!" she cries, in her shrill tones. "Who has seen her? Therese
spam	Defarge!"
ham	"She never missed before," says a knitting-woman of the sisterhood.
spam	"No; nor will she miss now," cries The Vengeance, petulantly. "Therese."
ham	"Louder," the woman recommends.
spam	Ay! Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear
ham	thee. Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet
ham	it will hardly bring her. Send other women up and down to seek her,
spam	lingering somewhere; and yet, although the messengers have done dread
spam	deeds, it is questionable whether of their own wills they will go far
spam	enough to find her!
spam	"Bad Fortune!" cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair, "and
ham	here are the tumbrils! And Evremonde will be despatched in a wink, and
spam	she not here! See her knitting in my hand, and her empty chair ready for
spam	her. I cry with vexation and disappointment!"
spam	As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrils
spam	begin to discharge their loads. The ministers of Sainte Guillotine are
ham	robed and ready. Crash!--A head is held up, and the knitting-women who
ham	scarcely lifted their eyes to look at it a moment ago when it could
ham	think and speak, count One.
spam	The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up. Crash!--And
ham	the knitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their Work, count Two.
spam	The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out next
spam	after him. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting out, but
spam	still holds it as he promised. He gently places her with her back to the
ham	crashing engine that constantly whirrs up and falls, and she looks into
spam	his face and thanks him.
spam	"But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am
spam	naturally a poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have been
ham	able to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we might
spam	have hope and comfort here to-day. I think you were sent to me by
ham	Heaven."
ham	"Or you to me," says Sydney Carton. "Keep your eyes upon me, dear child,
ham	and mind no other object."
ham	"I mind nothing while I hold your hand. I shall mind nothing when I let
spam	it go, if they are rapid."
spam	"They will be rapid. Fear not!"
spam	The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speak as
ham	if they were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand, heart to
spam	heart, these two children of the Universal Mother, else so wide apart
ham	and differing, have come together on the dark highway, to repair home
spam	together, and to rest in her bosom.
spam	"Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last question? I
spam	am very ignorant, and it troubles me--just a little."
spam	"Tell me what it is."
ham	"I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom I
spam	love very dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she lives in a
spam	farmer's house in the south country. Poverty parted us, and she knows
ham	nothing of my fate--for I cannot write--and if I could, how should I
spam	tell her! It is better as it is."
ham	"Yes, yes: better as it is."
spam	"What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still
spam	thinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so
spam	much support, is this:--If the Republic really does good to the poor,
spam	and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less, she may
ham	live a long time: she may even live to be old."
ham	"What then, my gentle sister?"
spam	"Do you think:" the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much
ham	endurance, fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and tremble:
ham	"that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in the better land
spam	where I trust both you and I will be mercifully sheltered?"
ham	"It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble there."
ham	"You comfort me so much! I am so ignorant. Am I to kiss you now? Is the
ham	moment come?"
ham	"Yes."
spam	She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other.
spam	The spare hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse than
ham	a sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face. She goes next before
ham	him--is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two.
spam	"I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: he that believeth
ham	in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and
spam	believeth in me shall never die."
spam	The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the pressing
ham	on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that it swells
spam	forward in a mass, like one great heave of water, all flashes away.
spam	Twenty-Three.
ham	        *****
ham	They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the
spam	peacefullest man's face ever beheld there. Many added that he looked
ham	sublime and prophetic.
spam	One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axe--a woman--had asked
ham	at the foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be allowed to
ham	write down the thoughts that were inspiring her. If he had given any
ham	utterance to his, and they were prophetic, they would have been these:
spam	"I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the Judge,
spam	long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the destruction of
spam	the old, perishing by this retributive instrument, before it shall cease
spam	out of its present use. I see a beautiful city and a brilliant people
ham	rising from this abyss, and, in their struggles to be truly free, in
spam	their triumphs and defeats, through long years to come, I see the evil
spam	of this time and of the previous time of which this is the natural
spam	birth, gradually making expiation for itself and wearing out.
ham	"I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful,
ham	prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see
ham	Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name. I see her father,
spam	aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to all men in his
spam	healing office, and at peace. I see the good old man, so long their
ham	friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all he has, and passing
spam	tranquilly to his reward.
spam	"I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of
spam	their descendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping
ham	for me on the anniversary of this day. I see her and her husband, their
spam	course done, lying side by side in their last earthly bed, and I know
spam	that each was not more honoured and held sacred in the other's soul,
ham	than I was in the souls of both.
ham	"I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man
spam	winning his way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him
ham	winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by the
ham	light of his. I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away. I see him,
spam	fore-most of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of my name,
spam	with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place--then fair to
ham	look upon, with not a trace of this day's disfigurement--and I hear him
ham	tell the child my story, with a tender and a faltering voice.
spam	"It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done; it is a
spam	far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known."
ham	End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens
spam	*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF TWO CITIES ***
ham	***** This file should be named 98-8.txt or 98-8.zip *****
ham	This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
spam	        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/98/
ham	Produced by Judith Boss
ham	Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
ham	will be renamed.
spam	Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
spam	one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
ham	(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
ham	permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
spam	set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
ham	copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
spam	protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
spam	Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
spam	charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
spam	do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
ham	rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
ham	such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
ham	research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
spam	practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
spam	subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
spam	redistribution.
spam	*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
spam	THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
ham	PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
spam	To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
spam	distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
ham	(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
spam	Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
spam	http://gutenberg.org/license).
spam	Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	electronic works
ham	1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
spam	electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
ham	and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
spam	(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
spam	the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
spam	all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
ham	If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
ham	Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
ham	terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
ham	entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
spam	1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
ham	used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
ham	agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
ham	things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
spam	even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
ham	paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
ham	and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
spam	works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
ham	1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
spam	or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
spam	collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
ham	individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
spam	located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
spam	copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
ham	works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
ham	are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
ham	Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
ham	freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
ham	this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
ham	the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
ham	keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
ham	1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
ham	what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
spam	a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
spam	the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
ham	before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
spam	creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
ham	Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
spam	the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
ham	States.
ham	1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
ham	1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
spam	access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
spam	whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
spam	phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
ham	Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
spam	copied or distributed:
spam	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
ham	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
spam	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
ham	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
ham	1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
ham	from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
spam	posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
ham	and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
spam	or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
spam	with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
spam	work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
ham	through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
spam	Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
ham	1.E.9.
spam	1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
spam	with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
ham	must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
spam	terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
ham	to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
ham	permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
spam	1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
spam	work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
ham	1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
ham	electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
ham	prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
ham	active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm License.
ham	1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
ham	compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
spam	word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
spam	distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
spam	"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
spam	posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
spam	you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
spam	copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
spam	request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
spam	form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
spam	License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
spam	1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
spam	performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
spam	unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
spam	1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
ham	access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
spam	that
spam	- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
spam	     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
ham	     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
spam	     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
spam	     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
ham	     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
spam	     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
ham	     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
spam	     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
spam	     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
ham	     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
spam	     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
ham	- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
spam	     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
spam	     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	     License.  You must require such a user to return or
spam	     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
ham	     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
ham	     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
ham	- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
ham	     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
spam	     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
ham	     of receipt of the work.
spam	- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
ham	     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
ham	1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
ham	forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
ham	both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
spam	Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
ham	Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
spam	1.F.
spam	1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
spam	effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
ham	public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
ham	works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
spam	"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
spam	corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
spam	property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
spam	computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
ham	your equipment.
spam	1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
ham	of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
ham	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
spam	Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
ham	Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
ham	liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
spam	fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
spam	LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
ham	PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
spam	TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
ham	LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
ham	INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
ham	DAMAGE.
ham	1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
ham	defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
spam	receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
ham	written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
ham	received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
ham	your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
ham	the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
ham	refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
ham	providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
spam	receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
spam	is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
ham	opportunities to fix the problem.
spam	1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
ham	in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
spam	WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
spam	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
ham	1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
spam	warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
spam	If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
ham	law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
ham	interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
ham	the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
spam	provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
spam	1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
spam	trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
ham	providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
spam	with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
spam	promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
ham	harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
ham	that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
ham	or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
ham	Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
ham	Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
ham	Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
spam	electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
spam	including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
spam	because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
spam	people in all walks of life.
spam	Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
ham	assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
ham	goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
spam	remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
ham	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
spam	and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
ham	To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
ham	and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
ham	and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
ham	Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
spam	Foundation
spam	The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
ham	501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
ham	state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
spam	Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
ham	number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
ham	http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
spam	Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
spam	permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
ham	The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
ham	Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
spam	throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
spam	809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
spam	business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
spam	information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
ham	page at http://pglaf.org
spam	For additional contact information:
ham	     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
spam	     Chief Executive and Director
ham	     gbnewby@pglaf.org
spam	Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
ham	Literary Archive Foundation
spam	Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spam	spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
spam	increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
spam	freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
ham	array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
spam	($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
ham	status with the IRS.
ham	The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
spam	charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
spam	States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
spam	considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
spam	with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
spam	where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
spam	SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
spam	particular state visit http://pglaf.org
ham	While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
spam	have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
spam	against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
ham	approach us with offers to donate.
spam	International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
ham	any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
spam	outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
ham	Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
ham	methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
spam	ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
ham	To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
spam	Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
ham	works.
spam	Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
spam	concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
ham	with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
ham	Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
spam	Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
spam	editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
spam	unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
ham	keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
spam	Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
ham	     http://www.gutenberg.org
ham	This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
spam	including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
ham	Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
ham	subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
